DJSCE - CSE (Data Science) syllabus document: Sem3_Honors_DJS23
(Scheme & Syllabus, Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering)

Scheme and Detailed syllabus (DJS23)
of
Honors Degree Program
in
Computational Finance
(Semester III)

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Scheme for Undergraduate Program in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)
Honors in Computational Finance
(Academic Year 2026-2027)

Prepared by Checked by Head of Department Vice Principal Principal

Honors in Computational Finance Semester: III
Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)
Course: Financial Market and Risk Analysis (DJS23DH1201)

Pre-requisite:
1. Basic Mathematics
Objectives:
1. To provide an understanding of various financial institutions, their functions, as well
as to introduce various financial instruments and their associated risks.
2. Measurement, analysis and managing the risk using advanced techniques.
3. To introduce risk exposure in money markets, capital markets, and forex markets.
Outcomes: On completion of the course, the learner will be able to:
1. Understand the structures, functions, and operations of financial institutions and markets
2. Identify and evaluate various financial instruments and assess the risks associated with them.
3. Assess the risk in money markets, capital markets and forex markets.

Financial Market and Risk Analysis (DJS23DH1201)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction to Financial Instruments:
Money, equity, debt instruments, foreign exchange and their risk structure. Introduction to
crypto currency (or contemporary currency)
07

2
Money Market Instruments and Structure of Risk:
Interest rate and valuation: present value and future value computation, annuity valuation,
loan amortization, capital recovery and sinking fund factory, money market instruments and
structure of their risk and returns.
Equity Market and Risk Matrix:
Stocks, Ordinary and Preferential Stocks, primary and secondary stock market, initial public
offering (IPO), public equity and private equity, stock market index, market participants,
trading risk in equity market.

09

3
Financial Markets and Products:
Structures and functions of financial institutions, structure and mechanics of over – the –
counter (OTC) and exchange markets, Spot market, Commodity market, Foreign
exchange market, Corporate bonds and mortgage-based-securities.

09

4
Debt Market, Structure of Risk and Return:
Risk and Return of Debt instruments, types of bonds, term structure for interest rates, yield
curve, spot rate and forward rate, duration and convexity of yield curve.

08

5
International Finance:
Foreign exchange market, determination of foreign exchange rate, purchasing power parity
theory, interest rate parity, Fisher effects, international Fisher effect.
Foreign Exchange Risk:
Currency derivatives, currency quotes, triangular currency arbitrage, exchange rate
exposure.

09
Total 42

Books Recommended:
Text books:
1. Jimmy Skoglund, Wei Chen, “Financial Risk Management”, Wiley Publication, 2015.
2. Bharti. V. Pathak, “The Indian Financial System,” Pearson Publication, 2018

Reference Books:
1. Saunders. A. and Cornett M, “Financial Markets and Institutions, McGraw Hill Education,
2014.
2. Hull. J. C,” Options, Future and other Derivatives, PHL publication 2013.
3. Brealey, Myers, Allen, “Principals of Corporate Finance, McGraw Hill, 2020

Web Links:
1. Financial Instruments:
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/wealth-management/financial-instrument/
2. NPTEL course in Financial Institution and Markets: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110105121

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal