DJSCE - CSE (Data Science) syllabus document: Sem4_Honors_DJS23
(Scheme & Syllabus, Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering)

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Scheme and Detailed syllabus (DJS23)
of
Honors Degree Program
in
Computational Finance
(Semester IV)

Scheme of Semester IV (DJS23) HONORS for Department of Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)

Sr.

No.

Course Code

Course
Teaching Scheme Semester End Examination (SEE) - A Continuous Assessment (CA) - B

Aggre
gate
(A+B)

Credits Earned

Theory
(Hrs)

Practical
(Hrs)

Tutorial
(Hrs)

Credits

Duration
(Hrs)

Theory

Oral

Pract

Oral
&
Pract

SEE
Total
(A)

Term
Test 1
(TT1)

Term
Test 2
(TT2)

Term
Test 3
(TT3)
Term
Test
Total
(TT1
+
TT2+
TT3)

Term
Work

CA
Total
(B)
1

2
DJS23DH1251 Computational Methods and
Pricing Models 3 -- -- 3 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100 3
4
DJS23DH1251L Computational Methods and
Pricing Models Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1
Total 3 2 -- 4 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 25 65 125 4 4

Honors in Computational Finance Semester: IV
Course: Computational Methods and Pricing Models (DJS23DH1251)
Computational Methods and Pricing Models Laboratory (DJS23DH1251L)

Pre-requisite: Basic Mathematics, Financial Markets and Risk Analysis
Course Objectives: To make students learn:
1. To introduce students to pricing financial instruments and the application of numerical
methods for option pricing.
2. Develop the ability to apply various option strategies and cash flow models to make informed
financial decisions.
3. Analyze risk management strategies and alternative investment options for optimizing
investment portfolios.
Outcomes: Students will be able to:
1. Explain the principles of financial instrument pricing and numerical methods for option pricing.
2. Make use of various option strategies and cash flow models for financial decision-making.
3. Apply risk management strategies and alternative investment options for portfolio optimization.

Computational Method and Pricing Models (DJS23DH1251)
Unit Description Duration
1
Basic Pricing Concepts
Overview of financial instruments: Debt instruments, Equity instruments,
Derivatives, Hybrid instruments, Role of financial instruments in financial markets,
Participants in the financial market, Concept of time value of money, No-Arbitrage
Principle, Forward Pricing: Pricing of forward contracts using no -arbitrage
conditions.

06

2
Swaps, Options and their Pricing
Introduction to Options and the Option Market, Key Terminologies in Options
Trading: European options and American options, strike pricing, Option Intrinsic
Value Status: ITM, ATM, OTM. Types of Options: Vanilla Options (Call and Put),
Exotic Options (Barrier, Asian, Lookback, etc.), Introduction to Option Pricing,
Introduction to analytical method in option pricing, The need for numerical
methods in option pricing. Black -Scholes Model: Introduction, Assumptions and
Limitations of the Black -Scholes model, Swaps: Fixed -to-floating interest rate
swaps and their pricing. Introduction to Numerical Integration: Trapezoidal and
Simpson's Rule.

10

3
Options Strategies and Their Payoff Profiles
Introduction to Option Strategies: Basics and Objectives, Single -Leg Strategies:
Long Call, Long Put, Covered Call, and Protective Put. Vertical Spreads: Bull Call
Spreads and Bear Put Spreads. Volatility Strategies: Straddles, Strangles, and Their
Payoff Profiles. Introduction to Neutral Market Strategies: Butterfly Spreads and
Iron Condors. Interpreting Payoff Diagrams and Brief Overview of Portfolio
Applications.

07

4
Deterministic Cash Flow Models
Introduction to Bonds and Basic Bond Pricing. Deterministic Cash Flows, Pricing
and Valuation of Perpetual Annuities, Fixed Cash Flow Models.

06

5
Financial Risk Management
Introduction to Risk Management in Finance and Market Completeness. Risk-
Neutral Pricing, Application of Risk-Neutral Pricing, Concept of portfolio and
Martingale Pricing, Hedging Strategies to Reduce Market Risk, Value at Risk
(VaR) in Financial Risk Management.

06

6
Alternative Investments and Structured Products
Introduction to Alternative Investments ((real estate, commodities, private equity,
hedge funds) Real Estate Valuation Techniques (Net Present Value (NPV),
Discounted Cash Flow (DCF)) Commodities Pricing (Cost of Carry model).
Introduction to private equity and venture capital investments, its valuation
techniques, Overview of common hedge fund strategies (long/short equity, market-
neutral, and arbitrage). Introduction to statistical arbitrage concepts.

07
Total 42

Suggested List of Experiments:

Computational Methods and Pricing Models Laboratory (DJS23DH1251L)
Sr. No. Title of the Experiment
1 Implement Loan Payment Calculator and Amortization Schedule.
2 Implement Mortgage Payment Calculator with Monthly Extra Principal Payments.
3 Implementation of Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model.

4
Perform Pricing a fixed-for-floating interest rate swap using the concept of the no-arbitrage
condition.
5 Advanced Option Strategies with Payoff Profiles and Greeks.
6 Calculate and plot payoff profiles Complex Option Strategies.
7 Implementation of Bond Pricing and Yield Curves with Sensitivity Analysis.
8 Calculate the present value of perpetual annuities and fixed cash flow models.
9 Demonstrate Risk-Neutral Pricing and Hedging Strategies.
10 Demonstrate Value at Risk (VaR) Calculation for a sample Portfolio.
11 Implementation for Real Estate Valuation Using NPV and DCF Models.
12 Analyzing commodities pricing using the Cost of Carry Model.

Minimum 8 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will be
included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignments (10m).

Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. Prassanna Chandra, Financial Management, Tata McGraw Hill education pvt. Ltd., 7th edition, 2020.
2. John C. Hull, Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives" Pearson Education, Inc, 9th edition, 2017.
3. Tuckman, Bruce, and Angel Serrat. Fixed income securities: tools for today's markets. John Wiley & Sons,
2nd edition, 2022.
4. Don M. Chance and Robert Brooks. An Introduction to Derivatives and Risk Management. Joe Sabatino.
8th edition, 2010.
5. Hossein B. Kazemi Keith H. Black Donald R. Chamber, Alternative Investment, Wiley & Sons, 3rd edition,
2016.

Reference Books:
1. Achdou, Yves, and Olivier Pironneau. Computational methods for option pricing. Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, 2005.
2. Wu, Lixin. Interest rate modeling: Theory and practice. CRC Press, 2019.
3. Tavella, Domingo. Quantitative methods in derivatives pricing: an introduction to computational
finance. John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
4. Jiang, Lishang. Mathematical modeling and methods of option pricing. World Scientific Publishing
Company, 2005.

Weblinks:
1. Coursera Course on Introduction to Financial Engineering and Risk Management:
https://www.coursera.org/learn/financial-engineering-intro
2. Coursera Course Pricing Options with Mathematical Models
https://www.coursera.org/learn/pricing-options-with-mathematical-models
3. NPTEL Course on Financial Derivatives & Risk Management
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc24_mg19/preview

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal