DJSCE - CSE (Data Science) syllabus document: Sem5_Honors_DJS23
(Scheme & Syllabus, Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering)

Scheme and detailed Syllabus (DJS23)
of
Honors Degree Program
in
Computational Finance
(Semester V)

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

With effect from the Academic Year: 2024-2025

Course Structure for Undergraduate Program in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)
Honors in Computational Finance
(Academic Year 2026-27)

Prepared by Checked by Head of Department Vice Principal Principal

Honors in Computational Finance Semester: V
Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)
Course: Econometric Modelling (DJS23DH1301)
Pre-requisite: Statistics for Data Science, Financial Market and Risk Analysis, Computational Methods and
Pricing Models.
Course Objectives: To develop advance statistics skills for financial data analysis.

Course Outcomes: On completion of the course, the learner will be able to:
1. Apply simple and multiple regression models for data analysis, while addressing violations of classical
regression assumptions.
2. Analyze advanced econometric techniques for time series analysis to extract insights from economic
data.
3. Evaluate practical econometric skills to solve real-world economic problems and apply theoretical
knowledge to data analysis.
Econometric Modelling (DJS23DH1301)
Unit Description Duration

1
Nature of Econometrics and Economic Data
Introduction to Econometrics, steps in Empirical Econometric Analysis, Structure of
Economic Data: Cross-section data, Time-series data, Pooled Cross Sections and Panel or
Longitudinal data. Causality and the Notion of Ceteris Paribus in Econometric Analysis.

04

2
Simple Linear Regression Models
Two variable case, Regression Vs Correlation, Linearity Vs Non-collinearity, Stochastic
specification: The significance of error term, Estimation: The principal of ordinary least
squares; Assumptions under CLRM, BLUE properties of estimators; The Gauss Markov
Theorem, Goodness of fit- R-squared; Tests of Hypotheses; Scaling and Units of
measurement; Confidence Intervals; Forecasting. K variable linear regression model:
estimation of parameters; Qualitative Independent variables-dummy variable trap.

09

3
Multiple Regression Analysis and Diagnostics Tests.
Multiple Regression Model, Analysis, Derivation of the parameters, Assumptions.
Geometric Interpretation, Frisch-Waugh –Lovell Theorem, Derivation of Residual Variance.

08

4
Violations of Classical Assumptions: Consequences, Detection and Remedy
Heteroscedasticity: problem and Consequences; Tests, Detection and Alternative methods of
estimation. Autocorrelation: Sources, Consequences, Tests of autocorrelation, Remedial
measures.

08

5
Multicollinearity
Nature of the Problem; Sources, Perfect multicollinearity vs Imperfect multicollinearity, Its
consequences; Detection and Remedies of multicollinearity.

06

6
Time Series Econometrics
AR, MA, and ARMA processes. Modelling Trends and Seasonality, Linear Probability
model, Introduction to Vector Autoregressive (VAR) models.

07
Total 42

Books Recommended:
Text books:
1. Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, “Introductory Econometrics,” South-Western Cengage, 7th edition, 2022.
2. Lokesh Boro and Niranjan Das, “Introductory Econometrics,” Bidya Bhawan, First Edition, 2021.
3. James H. Stock & Mark W. Watson, “Introduction to Econometrics,” Pearson, 4th edition, 2019.

Reference Books:
1. Brooks, Chris, “Introductory Econometrics for Finance,” Cambridge, 2019.
2. Damodar Gujrati, “Basic Econometrics,” McGraw Hill, 2020.
3. Francis X. Diebold, “Elements of Forecasting,” Cengage South-Western, 2019.
4. Kevin P. Murphy, “Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction,” MIT Press, 2022.

Web Links:
1. NPTEL – Econometrics: NPTEL course covering regression analysis, econometric models, hypothesis
testing, heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation, multicollinearity, and time series.
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110105094
2. Wooldridge Econometrics Resources (Companion resources for Jeffrey Wooldridge's "Introductory
Econometrics", including datasets and learning materials)
https://www.cengage.com/c/introductory-econometrics-a-modern-approach-7e-wooldridge/
2. Statsmodels Documentation (Python library documentation for regression analysis, time series
models (AR, MA, ARMA, VAR), and econometric diagnostics)
https://www.statsmodels.org/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal