DJSCE - CSE (Data Science) syllabus document: Sem5_DJS22
(Scheme & Syllabus, Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering)

Scheme and Detailed syllabus (DJS22)
Third Year B.Tech
in
Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
(Semester V)

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

DJS22DSC501 Machine Learning - II (Deep Learning) 3 -- -- 3 20 15 35 -- 35 2 65 -- -- -- 65 100 3
DJS22DSL501 Machine Learning - II Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 2 -- -- -- 25 25 50 1
DJS22DSC502 Intelligent Systems 3 -- -- 3 20 15 35 -- 35 2 65 -- -- -- 65 100 3
DJS22DSL502 Intelligent Systems Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 1
DJS22DSC503 Image Processing and Computer Vision - I 3 -- -- 3 20 15 35 -- 35 2 65 -- -- -- 65 100 3
DJS22DSL503 Image Processing and Computer Vision - I
Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 2 -- -- -- 25 25 50 1
4 DJS22DSL504 Big Data Engineering Laboratory 2 2 -- 3 -- -- -- 50 50 2 -- -- -- 50 50 100 3 3
DJS22DSC5011 Distributed Computing 3 -- -- 3 20 15 35 -- 35 2 65 -- -- -- 65 100 3
DJS22DSL5011 Distributed Computing Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 1
DJS22DSC5012 Time Series Analysis 3 -- -- 3 20 15 35 -- 35 2 65 -- -- -- 65 100 3
DJS22DSL5012 Time Series Analysis Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 1
DJS22DSC5013 Digital System Design 3 -- -- 3 20 15 35 -- 35 2 65 -- -- -- 65 100 3
DJS22DSL5013 Digital System Design Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 1
DJS22DSC5014 Probabilistic Graph Models 3 -- -- 3 20 15 35 25 60 2 65 -- -- -- 65 125 3
DJS22DSL5014 Probabilistic Graph Models Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 1
6 DJS22IHL Professional and Business Communication
Laboratory 4* -- 2 -- -- -- 50 50 -- -- -- -- -- -- 50 2 2
7 DJS22ILLL1 Innovative Product Development - III -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- 25 25 2 -- 25 -- -- 25 50 1 1
Total 23 22 0 34 140 105 245 325 570 22 455 25 0 100 580 1150 34 22
@ Any 1 Elective Course
* 2 hrs Theory (Class wise) and 2 hrs. Tutorial (Batch wise)
Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal
Course Structure for Third year Undergraduate Program in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) : Semester V ( Autonomous)
(Academic Year 2024-25)
Sr Course Code Course
Teaching Scheme Semester End Examination (B)
Aggregate
(A+B)Theory
(hrs.)
Practical
(hrs.) Theory OralTutorial
(hrs.)
Term
Test 2
(TT2)
Avg
(TT1 &
TT2)
4
Duration Pract Oral &
Pract
SEE
Total
Credits
earned
4
4
4
Credits
Continuous Assessment (A)
5@
3
1
2
Term
Test 1
(TT1)
Term
Work
Total
CA
Total

Continuous Assessment (A):

Course Assessment Tools Marks Time (hrs.)
Theory
a. One Term test (based on 40 % syllabus) 20 1
b. Second Term test (next 40 % syllabus ) /
presentation / assignment / course project / group
discussion / any other.
15 1
Total marks (a + b) 35 --
Audit
course
Performance in the assignments / qui / power point
presentation / poster presentation / group project /
any other tool.
--
As
applicable Laboratory Performance in the laboratory and documentation. 25
Tutorial Performance in each tutorial & / assignment. 25
Laboratory
&Tutorial Performance in the laboratory and tutorial. 50

The final certification and acceptance of term work will be subject to satisfactory performance upon
fulfilling minimum passing criteria in the term work / completion of audit course.

Semester End Assessment (B):

Course Assessment Tools Marks Time (hrs.)
Theory /
* Computer
based
Written paper based on the entire syllabus.
65 2
* Computer based assessment in the college premises.
Oral Questions based on the entire syllabus. 25 as applicable
Practical Performance of the practical assigned during the examination
and the output / results obtained. 25 2
Oral &
Practical

Project based courses - Performance of the practical assigned
during the examination and the output / results obtained.
Based on the practical performed during the examination and
on the entire syllabus.
As per the
scheme 2

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering
(Data Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Machine Learning - II (Deep Learning) (DJS22DSC501)
Course: Machine Learning - II Laboratory (DJS22DSL501)

Pre-requisite: Linear Algebra, Calculus, Probability, Statistics and Machine Learning Basics.

Course Objectives:
1. To introduce students with the fundamental concepts of artificial neural network and
different learning algorithms: supervised and unsupervised neural networks.
2. Develop in-depth understanding of the key techniques in designing Deep Network.
3. To expose Deep Network based methods to solve real world complex problems.
Outcomes: Students will be able to
1. Analyze different neural network architectures and their learning algorithms.
2. Implement deep network training and design concepts.
3. Build solution using appropriate neural network models.

Machine Learning - II (Deep Learning) (DJS22DSC501)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction to Artificial Neural Learning:
Fundamental concepts of biological Neural Networks, NN Architectures, Important
terminologies of ANN: Activation functions (Sigmoid, ReLu, Leaky ReLu, Tanh, Softmax),
weights, bias, threshold, learning rate, McCulloch Pitts Neuron: Theory and Architecture.
05
2
Supervised Learning Networks:
Perceptron: Representational power of Perceptron, The Perceptron Training Rule, Delta
Rule; Multilayer Networks: Representational Power of Feedforward Networks;
Backpropagation Algorithm: Convergence and local minima, Hypothesis space search and
Inductive Bias, Generalization, overfitting and stopping criteria.
Optimization for Training Deep Models: Challenges in Neural Network Optimization,
Basic Algorithms, Parameter Initialization Strategies. Optimizers: Gradient Descent
(Stochastic, Mini-Batch, Batch), SGD with Momentum, Nesterov Accelerated GD, Adagrad,
Adadelta, RMSProp, Adam, Regularization for Deep Learning: Parameter Norm Penalties,
Dataset Augmentation, Noise Robustness, Early Stooping, Sparse Representation, Dropout.
08
3
Convolutional Networks:
The Convolution Operation, sparse interactions, parameter sharing, Pooling, Convolution
and Pooling as an Infinity Strong Prior, Variants of Basic Convolution Function, Efficient
Convolution Algorithms (AlexNet, LeNet-5, VGG, DenseNet, InceptionNet, ResNet).
06

4
Sequence Modelling:
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Bidirectional RNNs, Deep recurrent Networks,
Recursive Neural Networks, The challenges of Long-Term Dependencies, Echo State
Networks, Leaky Units, The Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM).

06
5
Unsupervised Learning Networks:
Kohonen Self-Organizing Feature Maps – architecture, training algorithm, Kohonen Self-
Organizing Motor Map.
08

Autoencoders:
Sparse Autoencoder, Undercomplete Autoencoders, Regularized Autoencoders, Denoising
Autoencoders, Applications of Autoencoders. Linear Factor Methods such as Probabilistic
PCA and Factor Analysis, Independent Component Analysis.
6
Transfer Learning:
Fundamental of Transfer Learning, Pre -trained Model Approach, Freezing, Fine -tuning.
Transfer Learning Strategies: Inductive Learning, I nductive Transfer, Transductive
Transfer Learning, Unsupervised Transfer Learning; Types of Deep Transfer Learning:
Domain Adaptation, Domain Confusion, One -shot Learning, Zero -shot Learning,
Multitask Learning; Types of Transferable Components: Instance transfer, Feature -
representation transfer, Parameter transfer, Relational -knowledge transfer; Transfer
Learning Challenges: Negative Transfer, Transfer Bounds; Applications: Transfer learning
for NLP/ Audio/ Speech/ Computer Vision.
07
Total 39

Machine Learning - II Laboratory (DJS22DSL501)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1 Implement Boolean gates using perceptron.
2 Implement backpropagation algorithm from scratch.
3 Monitoring and evaluating deep learning models using Tensorflow and Keras.
4 Evaluate and analyze Prediction performance using appropriate optimizers for deep learning
models.
5 Implement Sentiment analysis on text dataset to evaluate customer reviews.
6 Building CNN models for image categorization.
7 Document classification using RNN models.
8 Outlier detection in time series dataset using RNN.
9 Anomaly detection using Self-Organizing Network.
10 Compare the performance of PCA and Autoencoders on a given dataset.
11 Transfer Learning with Pre-trained CNN model as a Feature Extractor for Image Classification
with a Data Availability Constraint.

Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. Simon Haykin, “Neural Networks and Learning Machines”, Pearson Prentice Hall, 3rd Edition, 2010.
2. S. N. Sivanandam and S. N. Deepa, “Introduction to Soft Computing”, Wiley India
Publications, 3rd Edition, 2018.

Reference Books:
1. François Chollet, “Deep Learning with Python”, Manning Publication, 2017.
2. Josh Patterson, Adam Gibson, “Deep Learning: A Practitioner's Approach”, O’Reilly Publication,
2017.
3. Andrew W. Trask, Grokking, “Deep Learning”, Manning Publication, 2019.
4. John D. Kelleher, “Deep Learning”, MIT Press Essential Knowledge series, 2019.

Web Links:
1. Learning Rule: http://vlabs.iitb.ac.in/vlabs-dev/labs/machine_learning/labs/explist.php
2. ANN Virtual Lab: http://cse22-iiith.vlabs.ac.in/List%20of%20experiments.html
3. Deep Learning: https://vlab.spit.ac.in/ai/#/experiments
4. NPTEL Course: Deep Learning Part 1: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_cs85/preview

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Intelligent Systems (DJS22DSC502)
Course: Intelligent Systems Laboratory (DJS22DSL502)

Pre-requisite: Basic Mathematics and Data Structures

Course Objectives:
1. Provide the basic ideas and techniques underlying the design of intelligent systems.
2. Impart the knowledge of various search techniques for problem solving.
3. Learn knowledge representation and provide the knowledge to deal with uncertain and
incomplete information.
4. Impart the knowledge of Intelligent planning.

Outcomes: Students will be able to:
1. Apply appropriate search-based method for a given problem.
2. Analyze various IS approaches to knowledge - problem solving, reasoning, and
intelligent planning.
3. Apply the knowledge of reasoning and intelligent planning to solve a problem.

Intelligent Systems (DJS22DSC502)
Unit Description Duration
1
Fundamentals:
Introduction to Intelligence Systems, Evolution, Categorization of Intelligent System,
Applications.
Problem solving:
Solving problem by Searching: Problem Solving Agent, Formulating Problems. State
Space Search: Uninformed search, Breadth First Search (B FS), Depth First Search
(DFS), Depth, Depth First Iterative Deepening (DFID). Heuristic Search: Best first
Search, Hill Climbing, Variations of Hill Climbing, Solution Space, and Travelling
Salesman Problem.
08
2
Optimizations:
Population Based Methods: Simulated annealing, Local beam search, Genetic
algorithm. Finding Optimal Paths: Branch and Bound, A*, Admissibility and
monotonicity properties of A*.
Game Playing:
Game Theory, Board games and game tree, The minimax algorithm, Alpha -Beta
Pruning.
09
3
Knowledge and Reasoning in Logic:
Logic, Soundness and Completeness, Propositional Logic, First Order Logic, forward
chaining, Backward chaining and Refutation. Uncertain Knowledge and Reasoning:
Fuzzy sets, Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Logic Controller.
06
4
Logic Foundation for Ontologies:
Knowledge Modelling, Definition, and importance of ontologies in AI, Components of
ontologies: classes, properties, individuals, Ontology development methodologies (e.g.
Protégé), Ontology languages (e.g. OWL, RDF), Ontolo gy reasoning and inference,
05

Applications of ontologies in AI (e.g. semantic web, knowledge management.
5
Ontology Modelling:
Advanced ontology modelling constructs (e.g. restrictions, class axioms), Ontology
alignment, merging and versioning, Ontology-based data access and integration,
Probabilistic and fuzzy ontologies, Rule-based reasoning with ontologies (e.g. SWRL),
Scalable ontology reasoning techniques, Real-world ontology case studies and industry
applications.
06
6
Planning:
Domain independent planning, Forward and Backward search, Goal Stack Planning,
Plan Space Planning, Means Ends Analysis, Graphplan, algorithm AO*.
05
Total 39

Intelligent Systems Laboratory (DJS22DSL502)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1 Implement domain specific function for different problems.
2 Identify and analyze uninformed search Algorithm to solve the problem. Implement
BFS/DFS/DFID search algorithms to reach goal state.
3 Program to implement Local Search algorithm: Hill climbing search.
4 Program on any natures inspired algorithm to solve a optimization problem in AI.
5 Implement A* search algorithm to reach goal state.
6 Implement minimax algorithm for a two-player game.
7 Implement Fuzzy operations for given input values.
8 Design a fuzzy logic controller for a given problem.
9 Develop a knowledge base using OWL.
10 Develop a Rule based System using SWRL on Protégé software.
Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. Deepak Khemani.” A First Course in Artificial Intelligence”, McGraw Hill Education (India), 2013.
2. Dean Allemang, James Hendler “Semantic Web for the Working Ontologist”, Elsevier 1st Edition,
2008.

Reference Books:
1. Saroj Kaushik “Artificial Intelligence”, First Edition, Cengage Learning, 2011.
2. Ivan Bratko “PROLOG Programming for Artificial Intelligence”, Fourth Edition, Pearson Education,
2011.
3. Elaine Rich and Kevin Knight “Artificial Intelligence” Third Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2008.
4. Davis E.Goldberg, “Genetic Algorithms: Search, Optimization and Machine Learning”, Addison
Wesley, N.Y.
5. Patrick Henry Winston, “Artificial Intelligence”, Addison-Wesley, Third Edition.
6. N.P.Padhy, “Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Systems”, Oxford University Press, 2005.
7. John Yen and Reza Langari, "Fuzzy Logic: Intelligence, Control, and Information", Pearson, 2002.

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Image Processing and Computer Vision - I (DJS22DSC503)
Course: Image Processing and Computer Vision - I Laboratory (DJS22DSL503)

Pre-requisite: Basic co-ordinate geometry, matrix algebra, linear algebra and random process.

Course Objectives: To teach various feature engineering and preprocessing techniques on image and
video data types.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Identify the need of different image and video pre-processing.
2. Apply different image and video corrections.
3. Compare different image and video processing methods.

Image Processing and Computer Vision - I (DJS22DSC503)
Unit Description Duration
1 Digital Image Fundamentals: Steps in Digital Image Processing, Components,
Image Sampling and Quantization, Neighborhood of pixels. 04

2
Image Enhancement (point processing): Image Negative, Thresholding, Gray -
level slicing with and without background, power law and log transform, Contrast
Stretching, Histogram equalization.
Image Enhancement in Spatial Domain (Neighbourhood processing): Low Pass
and High Pass filtering for image enhancement, High Boost Filtering, Basics of
Spatial Filtering, Generating Spatial Filter Masks –Smoothing and Sharpening
Spatial Filtering.
Image Transforms: 1-D DFT, 2 -D Discrete Fourier Transform and Its Inverse,
Some Properties of 2D DFT, Walsh -Hadamard, Discrete Cosine Transform, Haar
Transform, Slant Transform.
Image Enhancement in Frequency Domain: The Basics of Filtering in the
Frequency Domain, Smoothing and Sharpening frequency domain filters.
11

3
Morphology: Erosion and Dilation, Opening and Closing, The Hit or -Miss
Transformation. Restoration: Noise models – Mean Filters – Order Statistics –
Adaptive filters -Adaptive mean filter, Adaptive Gaussian Filter.
Corner and Interest Point detection: The Harris Interest Point Operator: Corner
Signals and shifts for various geometric configuration, Performance with crossing
point and Junctions, Different forms of Harris Operator, Local Invar iant Feature
Detectors and Descriptors: Harris scale and Affine- Invariant Detectors and
Descriptors.
08

4
Point, Line, and Edge Detection: Detection of Isolated Points, Line detection, edge
models, basic and advance edge detection (Kirsch Compass Kernels), Edge linking
and boundary detection, Canny's edge detection algorithm.
Thresholding: Foundation, Role of illumination, Basic Global thresholding, Otsu’s
method Region Based segmentation: Region Growing, Region Splitting and
merging, Relationships between pixels, Hough transform.
Region Identification: Chain code, simple geometric border representation
(Topological and region based descriptor).
Fourier Transform of boundaries, Boundary description using segment sequences.

08
5
Motion: Optical Flow, Interpretation of Optical Fields, Using focus of expansion
to avoid collision, Time to adjacency analysis, Basic difficulties with optical flow
models, Stero from Motion.
08
Total 39

Image Processing and Computer Vision - I Laboratory (DJS22DSL503)
Sr. No Title of the Experiments
1 To perform basic Image Processing, Geometric, Arithmetic and Logical operations on
Images.
2
To perform Spatial Domain Image Enhancement using different Point Processing
Techniques like Image Negative Transformation, Thresholding, Gray Level Slicing with without
background.
3 To perform Spatial Domain Image Enhancement using different Neighborhood Processing
Techniques.
4 To perform Histogram equalization.
5 To perform frequency domain Image Enhancement techniques.
6 To perform region-based segmentation.
7 To perform morphological operations on Image.
8 To perform edge detection using basic and advanced techniques.
9 To perform Image restoration using various filters.
10 To extract the key frames from a video.
11 To perform background subtraction in a video.
12 To perform motion analysis using Lucas-Kanade optical flow estimation Algorithm.

Books Recommended:

Textbooks:
1. Rafel C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods, “Digital Image Processing”, Pearson Education
Asia, 4th Edition, 2018.
2. Sanjit Mitra, “Digital Signal Processing: A Computer Based Approach”, Tata McGraw Hill, 4th
Edition, 2013.
Reference Books:
1. S. Salivahanan, A. Vallavaraj, C. Gnanapriya, “Digital Signal Processing”, Tata McGraw Hill
Publication 4th Edition, 2019.
2. E. R. Davies, “Computer and Machine Vision: Theory, Algorithms”, Academic Press, 4th

Edition, 2012.
3. S. Jayaraman, E. Esakkirajan and T. Veerkumar, “Digital Image Processing”, Tata McGraw
Hill Education Private Ltd, 1st Edition, 2017.
4. Anil K. Jain, “Fundamentals and Digital Image Processing”, Pearson Education, 1st Edition,
2015.
5. John G. Proakis, Dimitris and G. Manolakis, “Digital Signal Processing: Principles,
Algorithms, and Applications”, Pearson Education, 4th Edition, 2014.
A. Anand Kumar, “Digital Signal Processing”, Prentice Hall, 2nd Edition, 2015.
6. S. Sridhar, “Digital Image Processing”, Oxford University Press, 2nd Edition, 2016.
Web Links:
1. NPTEL Digital Image Processing, By Prof. Prabir Kumar Biswas, IIT Kharagpur:
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/105/117105135/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Big Data Engineering Laboratory (DJS22DSL504)

Pre-requisite: Foundations of Data Analysis, Database Management System, Python Laboratory,
Java and Scala Laboratory.

Objectives: The objective of this lab is to provide the basic framework of handling and processing
big data.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Relate to the need of different types of data preprocessing tools/methods.
2. Use appropriate tool/method for a specific Data Engineering task.
Sr. No Suggested List No of Hours
1
Hadoop Ecosystem
 Understanding inputs and outputs of Map Reduce Concept of
Hadoop.
 The Map Tasks, grouping by Key, The Reduce Tasks,
Combiners, Details of Map Reduce Execution.
 HDFS file system - Command line.
 Overview of resource management – YARN.
04
2
Infrastructure Implementation
 Introduction to Kubernetes and Docker.
 Setting up applications on Kubernetes and Docker.
 Creating Docker images and deploying them.
04
3
Messaging Service
 Differentiate between different types of connections: Point -to-
point, Broadcast/Multicast and Multi point.
 Real time messaging using AMPS.
 Pub / Sub models.
 Allows subscribers to apply filters on server level.
02
4
Messaging Service
 Need of scalability and concurrency in the messaging services.
 Real time messaging, ensuring scalability and concurrency using
Kafka.
 Pub / Sub models.
 Allows subscribers to apply filters on client side.
02
5
Data Processing
 Need of advance methods for data processing of Big Data
 Introduce SPARK.
 Real time and Batch processing of high volume of data.
 Write scripts using Java/ Python/Scala.
 Processing high volume records in-memory.
08

 Integration with Hive, HDFS, Kafka, event hub and other
messaging and storage system.
6
Data Warehouse
 Need of advance methods for data warehousing for storing Big
data.
 Introduce HIVE.
 Storage of data on HDFS for high volume data.
 Perform Analytical queries using Map Reduce.
02
7
No SQL Data Store
 Difference between SQL and NoSQL data stores.
 Types of NoSQL Data stores.
 Introduce HBase.
 Demonstration of Dynamic Scaling.
02
8
No SQL Data Store
 NoSQL Databases for different use cases.
 DynamoDB - Serverless AWS service for storing data in bytes.
 MongoDB - Data Storage as documents (Binary JSON -BSon).
 Pipeline, query aggregation, complex querying, transaction.
04
9
ETL Task
 Introduce AWS Glue for ETL.
 Data Integration service from multiple sources.
 Keeping track of schema in form of catalogue.
 Data query via Amazon Athena, Amazon EMR, and Amazon
Redshift Spectrum.
04
10
Data Retrieval
 Introduction to Open-Source Indexing Engine Elastic Search for
transactional data.
 Data querying, aggregation, visualization, log extraction and
analytics.
04
11
Cold Data Retrieval AWS S3, Athena and Redshift
 Introduction of AWS S3, Athena and RedShift.
 Storing / Extracting data in S3 in different forms (csv, parquet,
text).
 Querying the data via Athena / Redshift.
04
Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Joe Reis and Matt Housley, “Fundamentals of Data Engineering: Plan and Build Robust Data
Systems”, O’Reilley, 1st Edition, 2022.
2. Stevan N Brunton and J Nathan Kutz, “Data-Driven Science and Engineering: Machine
Learning, Dynamical Systems, and Control”, Cambridge University Press, 1st Edition, 2019.
3. Tom White, "Hadoop: The Definitive Guide", O'Reilley, 3rd Edition, 2012.
4. Eric Sammer, "Hadoop Operations", Reilly, 1st Edition, 2012.
5. Pramod J Sadalge and Martin Fowler, “NoSQL Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Emerging
World of Polyglot Persistence”, Addison-Wesley Professional publications, 1st Edition, 2012.

Reference Books:
1. Paul Zikopoulos, Chris Eaton, Dirk DeRoos, Tom Deutsch, George Lapis, “Understanding
Big Data: Analytics for Enterprise Class Hadoop and streaming Data”, The McGraw -Hill
Companies, 1st Edition, 2017.
2. Gaurav Vaish, “Getting Started with NoSQL”, Packt Publishing, 1st Edition, 2013.
3. Manoj Kukreja, “Data Engineering with Apache Spark, Delta Lake, and Lakehouse”, Packt
Publishing, 1st Edition, 2021.
4. Scott Haines, “Modern Data Engineering with Apache Spark: A Hands -On Guide for
Building Mission-Critical Streaming Applications”, Apress Publications, 1st Edition, 2022.

WebLinks:
1. Real-time Bigdata Messaging Services: Built for realtime: Big data messaging with
Apache Kafka, Part 1 | InfoWorld
2. Understanding Big data Processing: Understanding Big Data Processing: 2022's Ultimate
Guide - Learn | Hevo (hevodata.com)
3. Serverless Databases: What Is Serverless? An Overview | Knowledge Base | Dashbird
4. Kubernet Vs Docker: Kubernetes vs. Docker: Why Not Both? | IBM

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

DEPARTMENT ELECTIVES

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Distributed Computing (DJS22DSC5011)
Course: Distributed Computing Laboratory (DJS22DSL5011)

Pre-requisite: Operating Systems

Course objectives: The objective of this course is to introduce the fundamentals of distributed
computing that includes system architecture, programming model, design, and implementation
and performance analysis of these systems.

Course outcomes: On successful completion of course, learner will be able to:
1. Demonstrate Interprocess Communication and Synchronization in a Distributed System.
2. Apply appropriate Resource, Process management, File and Memory technique in a
given Distributed Environment for efficient processing.
3. Apply suitable methods to improve data availability in a system.

Distributed Computing (DJS22DSC5011)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction: Distributed Computing Models, Issues in Designing Distributed Systems,
Network communication: LAN and WAN technologies, Protocols for Network Systems,
Asynchronous Transfer Mode.
04
2
Communication: Interprocess Communication: Message Passing, Group
Communication, API for Internet Protocols; Remote Communication: Middleware,
Remote Procedural Call (RPC) Basics, RPC Implementation, RPC Communication,
Exception Handling and Security, RPC in Heterogeneous environment, Failure Handling,
RPC Optimization.
07
3
Synchronization: Clock Synchronization, Logical Clocks, Global State, Mutual
Exclusion: Centralized, Decentralized, Distributed and Token Ring Algorithms, Election
Algorithms: Ring and Bully election algorithms, Deadlocks in Distributed Systems.
06
4
Resource and Process Management: Desirable features of a global scheduling
algorithm, Task Assignment Approach, Load Balancing Approach, Load Sharing
Approach, Functions of Distributed Process Management, Desirable features of a process
migration mechanism, Process migrations and Threads.
06
5.
Consistency, Replication and Fault Tolerance: Introduction to Replication and
Consistency, Data-Centric (Continuous Consistency, Consistent Ordering of Operation)
and Client-Centric (Eventual Consistency, Monotonic Read, Monotonic Write, Read your
Writes, Writes follow Reads); Consistency Models, Replica Management; Fault
Tolerance: Introduction, Process resilience, Reliable client-server and group
communication, Recovery.
08
6.
Distributed Shared Memory (DSM) and Distributed File System (DFS): DSM
Architecture, Types of DSM, Advantages of DSM, Design Issues in DSM systems, Issues
in Implementing DSM systems; Introduction to DFS, DFS Designs, DFS Implementation,
File Caching and Replication in DFS.
08
Total 39

Distributed Computing Laboratory (DJS22DSL5011)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1 Implement Client/server using RPC/RMI.
2 Implementation of multi tread application.
3 Implement Inter-process communication.
4 Implement Group Communication.
5 Implement Load Balancing Algorithm.
6 Implement Election Algorithm.
7 Implement Clock Synchronization algorithms.
8 Implement Mutual Exclusion Algorithm.
9 Implement Deadlock management in Distributed systems.
10 Implement Distributed File System.

Books Recommended:

Text Books:
1. Andrew S. Tanenbaum and Maarten Van Steen, ―Distributed Systems: Principles and
Paradigms, 2nd edition, Pearson Education, 2017.
2. Sunita Mahajan and Seema Shah, “Distributed Computing”, Oxford University Press, 2013.

Reference Books:
1. S. Tanenbaum an d M. V. Steen, "Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms", Second
Edition, Prentice Hall, 2006.
2. M. L. Liu, ―Distributed Computing Principles and Applications‖, Pearson Addison Wesley,
2019.
3. George Coulouris, Jean Dollimore, Tim Kindberg, "Distributed Systems: Concepts and
Design", 5th Edition, Pearson Education, 2011.

Web Links:
1. NPTEL Course: Distributed Computing Systems: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106107
2. NPTEL Course: Distributed Systems: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106168

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Time Series Analysis (DJS22DSC5012)
Course: Time Series Analysis Laboratory (DJS22DSL5012)

Pre-requisite: Probability, Statistics and Linear Models.

Objectives: Learn basic analysis of time series data; concepts in time series regression; auto-
regressive and model averaging models; learn basic concepts of spectral analysis and space-
time models.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able
1. Interpret a correlogram and a sample spectrum.
2. Apply appropriate model for a time series dataset.
3. Compute forecasts for a variety of linear and non-linear methods and models.

Time Series Analysis (DJS22DSC5012)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction: Formal definition of a time series, Interpolation vs Extrapolation,
Components of time series, Models of Time Series Analysis, Types of forecasting
methods, Types of Time Series, Types of time series patterns, different types of data,
simple descriptive t echniques, Trends in time series (Parametric trends, differencing,
non-parametric methods, noise), measurement of trends, seasonality, seasonal indices,
stochastic processes, correlogram.
Stationary Time Series: the sample mean and its standard error, Stat ionary processes
(weak and strict), statistical inference of time series.
08
2
Linear Time Series: Motivation, Autocorrelation function (ACF) and Partial
Autocorrelation function (PACF) plot, Linear time series and MA models, theoretical
properties of time series with a MA (1) and MA (2) model, The AR model, simulating
from an autoregressive process, The ARMA model, The ARIMA model, Unit roots with
|ϕ|, backshift and lag operator, integrated and non-invertible processes, SARIMA model,
Box – Jenkins Model Selection.
08
3
Prediction: Using prediction in estimating, forecasting for autoregressive processes (1),
forecasting for AR(p), forecasting for general time series using infinite past, forecasting
for ARIMA model, Ψ -weight representation of ARIMA model, One -step ahead
predictors based on the finite past: Levinson -Durbin algorithm, Kalman filter.
06
4
Models with Trend: Removing trend, Unit Root (Augmented Dickey Fuller Test) and
Regression Residuals, The Monte Carlo Method, Multi-equation Time Series Models:
Intervention Analysis, Estimating the Intervention Effect, ADLs and Transfer
Functions, Introduction to VAR Analysis.
06

5
Multivariate Time Series: Background: Sequences and Functions, Convolution using
Fourier transform, Methods for Estimating the Spectral Density, Smoothing Method
(Nonparametric Estimation of the Spectral Density); Multivariate time series regression:
Conditional independence, Partial correlation and coherency between time series.
06
6
Non Linear Time series: The ARCH model: Feature of an ARCH, interpretation of
ARCH model, The GARCH model: Existence of stationary solution of a GARCH(1,1)
and Bilinear models.
05
Total 39

Time Series Analysis Laboratory (DJS22DSL5012)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1
Trends: (1) Detecting trends using Hodrick -Prescott Filter.
(2) Detrending a Time Series (Pandas, SciPy Signal, HP filter).
2
Seasonality: (1) Multiple Box Plots.
(2) Autocorrelation Plot.
(3) Deseasoning of Time-Series Data.
(4) Seasonal Decomposition (Additive and Multiplicative).
(5) Detecting Cyclic Variations.
3 Data Wrangling and Preparation for Time Series Data.
4 Smoothing Methods (Simple exponential, Double exponential, Triple exponential).
5 Making Data Stationary using Augmented Dicky Fuller Test.
6 Autoregressive Moving Average Model.
7 ARIMA Model.
8 VAR Model.
9 ARCH and GARCH Models.
10 Mini Project.

Books Recommended:

Text Books
1. Walter Enders,” Applied Econometric Time Series,” Fourth Edition, Wiley, 2014.
2. B. V. Vishwas and Ashish Patel, “Hands-on Time Series Analysis with Python,” First Edition,
Apress, 2020

Reference Books

1. Chris Chatfield, “Time- Series Forecasting,” First Edition, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2001.
2. Douglas C. Montgomery, Cheryl L. Jennings and Nurat Kulahci, “Introduction to Time
Series Analysis and Forecasting,” Second Edition, Wiley, 2015.
3. Aileen Nielsen, “Practical Time Series Analysis,” O’Reilly, 2019.
4. James D Hamilton, “Time Series Analysis,” Princeton University Press, 1994.
5. Robert H. Shumway and David S. Stoffer, “Time Series Analysis and Its Applications,”
Springer, 2000.

Web Links:
1. A course on Time Series Analysis.
https://web.stat.tamu.edu/~suhasini/teaching673/time_series.pdf
2. A comprehensive guide to Time Series Analysis.
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/10/a-comprehensive-guide-to-time-
series-analysis/
3. The Complete Guide to Time Series Analysis and Forecasting.
https://towardsdatascience.com/the-complete-guide-to-time-series-analysis-and-
forecasting-70d476bfe775

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Digital System Design (DJS22DSC5013)
Course: Digital System Design Laboratory (DJS22DSL5013)

Pre-requisite: Basic Electrical & Electronics Engineering

Objectives:
1. To introduce different digital codes and their conversions.
2. To introduce methods for minimizing logical expressions.
3. To outline the formal procedure to design combinational logic circuits.
4. To introduce flip flops and outline the formal procedure to sequential circuits.
5. To illustrate concept of programmable devices

Outcomes: On successful completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Explain different digital codes and their conversions.
2. Minimize logic expressions using various reduction techniques.
3. Analyze and design combinational logic circuits.
4. Design flip-flops using logic gates and use them to realize different sequential circuits.
5. Classify different programmable logic devices.

Digital System Design (DJS22DSC5013)
Unit Description Duration
1
Digital codes and binary arithmetic: Signed Binary number representation: Sign
Magnitude, 1’s complement, 2’s complement representation and binary
arithmetic’s. Codes: Binary, BCD, XS -3, Gray code, ASCII, EBCDIC, Parity,
Hamming, conversions.
12
2
Minimization techniques and Logic gates: Logic Gates: AND, OR, NOT,
NAND, NOR, Exclusive –OR and Exclusive –NOR, Implementations of Logic
Functions using universal gates. Boolean postulates and laws – De-Morgan’s
Theorem, Boolean expression - Minterm – Maxterm - Sum of Products (SOP) –
Product of Sums (POS), Minimization of Boolean expressions ––– Karnaugh
map Minimization – Quine - Mc Cluskey method of minimization, don’t care
conditions.
08
3
Design of Combinational Logic: Introduction to combinational logic, Code
converter: BCD, Excess -3, Gray code, Binary Code, Half - Adder, Full Adder,
Half Subtractor, Full Subtractor, Binary Adder, BCD adder, Look ahead carry
generator, Multiplexers - MUX tree, Encoder, De -multiplexer & Decoders,
Implementation of SOP and POS using Multiplexer & De-multiplexer/Decoder.
04
4
Sequential Logic Design: Introduction to sequential logic, Flip- flop: SR, JK, D,
T; Preset & Clear, Truth Tables and Excitation tables, Conversion, Shift
Registers: SISO, SIPO, PISO, PIPO, Bi -directional, Counters: Asynchronous
counter, Synchronous counter, ring counters, Johnson Counter, Modulus of the
counter. State Machines: Basic design steps - State diagram, State table, State
reduction, State assignment, Mealy and Moore machines representation,
09

Sequence detector.
5
Programmable Logic Devices: Programmable logic devices: Architecture of
PROM, PAL, PLA, designing combinational circuits using PLDs. General
Architecture of FPGA and CPLD, introduction to Hardware Description
Language.
06
Total 39

Digital System Design Laboratory (DJS22DSL5013)
Exp. Name of Experiment
1 Implement 8:3 octal to binary code converter using encoder IC 74148.
2 Verify different logic gates (introduce logic families CMOS and TTL and electrical and
switching parameters).
3 Simplification of Boolean functions.
4 Verify Universal gates NAND and NOR and design EXOR and EXNOR gates using Universal
gates.
5 Implement Half adder, Full adder, Half subtractor and Full subtractor circuits.
6 To study and implement 4-bit magnitude comparator using IC 7485 and verify its truth table.
7 Implement BCD adder using 4-bit binary adder IC-7483.
8 Flip flops conversion JK to D, JK to T and D to T FF.
9 Implement logic equations using Multiplexer.
10 Design synchronous MOD N counter using IC-7490.
11 Verify encoder and decoder operations.
12 Implement 1:8 De-multiplexer using IC 74138.
13 Implement the functions using 8:1 Multiplexer with the help of IC 74151.
14 Implement digital circuits to perform binary to gray and gray to binary operations.
15 Verify different counter operations.
16 Verify the functions of Universal Shift Register IC 74194: Parallel loading, Right shift, Left shift
17 Implement any two above experiments using HDL.

Books Recommended:
Text books:
1. John F. Wakerly, “Digital Design Principles and Practices”, Pearson Education, Fifth Edition,
2018.
2. R. P. Jain, “Modern Digital Electronics”, Tata McGraw Hill 4th Edition, 2010.
3. M. Morris Mano, “Digital Logic and computer Design”, PHI 4th Edition 2010.

Reference Books:
1. Thomas L. Floyd, “Digital Fundamentals”, Pearson Prentice Hall, Eleventh Global Edition,
2015.
2. Mandal, “Digital Electronics Principles and Applications”, McGraw Hill Education, First
Edition, 2010.
3. Ronald J. Tocci, Neal Widmer, “Digital Systems Principles and Applications”, Twelfth Edition,
PHI (2017)
4. Donald P Leach, Albert Paul Malvino, “Digital Principles and Applications”, Tata McGraw Hill,
Eighth edition, 2015.

5. Balabanian, Carlson, “Digital Logic Design Principles”, Wiley Publication 3rd Edition, 2000.
6. Holdsworth and R. C. Woods, “Digital Logic Design”, 4thEdition, Newnes, 2002.
7. William I. Fletcher, “An Engineering Approach to Digital Design”, Tenth Edition, PHI, 2015.

Web Links:
1. Digital Electronic Circuits Lab: http://vlabs.iitkgp.ac.in/dec/#
2. Virtual Lab: https://cse15-iiith.vlabs.ac.in/List%20of%20experiments.html
3. NPTEL Course: Digital System Design: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108106177

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Probabilistic Graph Models (DJS22DSC5014)
Course: Probabilistic Graph Models Laboratory (DJS22DSL5014)

Pre-requisite: Machine learning, Probability

Course Objectives: The objective of this course intends to model problems using graphical models;
design inference algorithms; and learn the structure of the graphical model from data.

Outcomes: Students will be able to
1. Explain the basic fundamentals of probabilistic graphical models.
2. Illustrate various principles of representation methods, learning and inference algorithms.
3. Integrate theoretical knowledge of graphical models to solve problems.

Probabilistic Graph Models (DJS22DSC5014)
Unit Description Duration
1
Fundamentals: Overview and Motivation of Probabilistic Graphical Models,
Structured Probabilistic Models, Marginal and Joint Distributions, Independence
and Conditional Independence, Factors.
Bayesian networks (Representation): Semantics and Factorization, Reasoning
Patterns, Flow of Probabilistic Influence, Conditional Independence, Independence
in Bayesian Networks, Naïve Bayes, Applications.
05
2
Temporal Models of Bayesian Network (Representation): Overview of Temporal
Models, Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBN), Hidden Markov Model (HMM), Plate
Models.
Structured CPDs (Representation): Overview of Structured CPDs, Tree -
Structured CPDs, Independence of Casual Influence, Continuous Variable,
Applications.
07
3
Markov networks (Representation): Pairwise Markov Networks, General Gibbs
Distribution, Conditional Random Fields, Independencies in Markov Networks, I -
maps and perfect maps.
06
4
Exact inference (Inference): Conditional Probability Queries, MAP Inference,
Analysis of Complexity, Sum - and Max-product algorithms, Variable elimination,
Belief propagation (message passing) on trees, Clique tree.
06
5 Inference and sampling methods (Inference): Simple Sampling, MCMC method,
Gibbs sampling Algorithm, Importance sampling, Particle filtering. 06
6
Parameter Estimation (Learning): Learning Overview, Maximum Likelihood
Estimation for Bayesian Networks, Bayesian Estimation, Bayesian Prediction,
Bayesian Estimation for Bayesian Networks. Maximum Likelihood for Log-Linear
Models, Maximum Likelihood for MRFs and CRFs.
Structure Learning: Overview, Likelihood Scores, BIC and Asymptotic
Consistency, Bayesian Scores, Learning Tree Structured Networks, Learning
General Graphs: Heuristic Search.
09
Total 39

Probabilistic Graph Models Laboratory (DJS22DSL5014)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1 Implement Discrete Bayesian Networks.
2 Implementation of Alarm Bayesian Network.
3 Implementation of Linear Gaussian Bayesian Networks (GBNs).
4 Implementation of Monty Hall Problem using Bayesian Network.
5 Implementation of Exact inference in Bayesian Networks.
6 Implementation of Inference in Discrete Bayesian Network.
7 Implementation of Causal Inference.
8 Implement Approximate Inference using MCMC.
9 Implementation of Parameter Learning in Discrete Bayesian Networks.
10 Mini Project.

Books Recommended:

Text Books
1. Koller, D. and Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and
Techniques. MIT Press.

Reference Books
1. Jensen, F. V. and Nielsen, T. D. (2002). Bayesian Networks and Decision Graphs.
Information Science and Statistics. Springer, 2nd edition.
2. Marloes Maathuis, Mathias Drton, Steffen Lauritzen, Martin Wainwright, Handbook of
Graphical Models, Routledge Taylor and Francis group, 2020
3. Kevin P. Murphy (2013) Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. 4th Printing. MIT
Press.
4. Barber, D. (2011). Bayesian Reasoning and Machine Learning. Cambridge University Press,
1st edition.
5. Bishop, C. M. (2011). Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics). Springer, 2nd printing.
6. Wainwright, M. and Jordan, M. (2008). Graphical Models, Exponential Families, and
Variational Inference. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 1:1–305.

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Professional and Business Communication Laboratory (DJS22IHL)

Pre-requisite: Basic course in Effective Communication Skills

Objectives:
1. To inculcate professional and ethical attitude at the workplace.
2. To enhance communication and interpersonal skills.
3. To develop effective employability skills.
4. To hone written skills for technical documentation.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Prepare technical documents using appropriate style, format, and language.
2. Use employability skills to optimize career opportunities.
3. Employ storytelling techniques in corporate situations.
4. Conduct effective meetings and document the process.
5. Demonstrate interpersonal skills in professional and personal situations.
6. Describe cultural differences, etiquettes, and the concept of professional ethics.
Professional and Business Communication Laboratory (DJS22IHL2)
Description Duration
Unit 1: Technical Writing

Report Writing: Types of reports, Basic structure of a report, collection of data
through questionnaires, survey analysis, language and style in reports.
Business Proposal Writing: Types of business proposals, format of proposal,
language and style, presentation of proposal.
Plagiarism: Types of plagiarism, consequences of plagiarism.
06
Unit 2: Employment Skills

Group Discussion: Purpose of a GD, types of GD, criteria for evaluating GD,
Dos and Don’ts of GD.
Resume Writing: Types of resumes, structure, content and formatting of resume
Interview Skills: Types and modes of interview, Preparation for interview, Dos
and Don’ts of interview, frequently asked questions during interview.
Presentation Skills: Presentation strategies, overcoming stage fear, techniques to
prepare effective PowerPoint presentation.
08
Unit 3: Corporate Story Telling

Basics of storytelling: Setting, characters, plot, crisis, climax, resolution,
Benefits of storytelling.
Types of stories: Elevator pitch, product stories, event stories, stories in
presentations, storytelling in SOP’s and interviews, storytelling to manage
conflict or to motivate.
Storytelling techniques: Narration using verbal and non-verbal communication,
Analysis of storytelling strategies of corporate master storytellers.
03

Unit 4: Meetings and Documentation

Planning and preparation for meetings: Planning layout of meetings, arranging
logistics, defining roles and responsibilities.
Strategies for conducting effective meetings: Follow the agenda, record
discussion, observe meeting decorum.
Documentation: Draft notice, agenda and minutes of meeting.
Business meeting etiquettes: Verbal and non-verbal aspects of etiquettes.
02
Unit 5: Introduction to Interpersonal Skills

Emotional Intelligence: Definition, difference between IQ and EQ, how to
develop EQ.
Leadership: Types of leadership, leadership styles, case studies.
Team Building: Difference between group and team, importance of teamwork,
strategies to be a good team player.
Time Management: Importance of time management, cultural views of time,
80/20 rule, time wasters, setting priorities and goals.
Conflict Management: Types of conflicts, strategies to manage conflict, case
studies.
05
Unit 6: Cross-cultural communication and Professional ethics

Communication across cultures: Understanding cultures and developing
sensitivity towards cultural differences.
Corporate etiquettes: Telephone, dining, cubicle etiquette, etc.
Professional ethics: Effective work habits, accountability, integrity and
excellence.
05
Professional and Business Communication Laboratory
Laboratory (conducted batch wise) will comprise of activities and assignments based on the
syllabus)
*The term work will be calculated based on Tutorials (25m), Business Proposal (15m) and Group
Discussion (10m).
Books Recommended:
1. Fred Luthans, “Organizational Behavior”, McGraw Hill, edition
2. Lesiker and Petit, “Report Writing for Business”, McGraw Hill, edition
3. Huckin and Olsen, “Technical Writing and Professional Communication”, McGraw Hill
4. Wallace and Masters, “Personal Development for Life and Work”, Thomson Learning, 12th
edition
5. Heta Murphy, “Effective Business Communication”, Mc Graw Hill, edition
6. Sharma R.C. and Krishna Mohan, “Business Correspondence and Report Writing”, Tata
McGraw- Hill Education
7. Ghosh, B. N., “Managing Soft Skills for Personality Development”, Tata McGraw Hill.
Lehman,
8. Bell, Smith, “Management Communication” Wiley India Edition, 3rd edition.
9. Dr. Alex, K.,” Soft Skills”, S Chand and Company
10. Subramaniam, R., “Professional Ethics” Oxford University Press.
11. Sandeep Das, “How Business Story Telling Works: Increase Your Influence and Impact”
Penguin Random House India Pvt. Ltd.
Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data
Science)
T.Y. B.Tech Semester: V
Course: Innovative Product Development - III (DJS22ILLL1)

Objectives:
1. To acquaint the students with the process of identifying the need (considering a societal
requirement) and ensuring that a solution is found out to address the same by designing and
developing an innovative product.
2. To familiarize the students with the process of designing and developing a product, while they
work as part of a team.
3. To acquaint the students with the process of applying basic engineering fundamentals, so as to
attempt at the design and development of a successful value-added product.
4. To inculcate the basic concepts of entrepreneurship and the process of self-learning and research
required to conceptualize and create a successful product.

Outcome: Learner will be able to:
1. Identify the requirement for a product based on societal/research needs.
2. Apply knowledge and skills required to solve a societal need by conceptualizing a product,
especially while working in a team.
3. Use standard norms o f engineering concepts/practices in the design and development of an
innovative product.
4. Draw proper inferences through theoretical/ experimental/simulations and analyze the impact
of the proposed method of design and development of the product.
5. Develop interpersonal skills, while working as a member of the team or as the leader.
6. Demonstrate capabilities of self -learning as part of the team, leading to life -long learning,
which could eventually prepare themselves to be successful entrepreneurs.
7. Demonstrate product/project management principles during the design and development work
and also excel in written (Technical paper preparation) as well as oral communication.

Guidelines for the proposed product design and development:
1. Students shall form a team of 3 to 4 students (max allowed: 5-6 in extraordinary cases, subject
to the approval of the department review committee and the Head of the department).
2. Students should carry out a survey and identify the need, which shall be converted into
conceptualization of a product, in consultation with the faculty supervisor/head of
department/internal committee of faculty members.
3. Students in the team shall understand the effective need for product development and
accordingly select the best possible design in consultation with the faculty supervisor.
4. Students shall convert the best design solution into a working model, using various
components drawn from their domain as well as related interdisciplinary areas.
5. Faculty supervisor may provide inputs to students during the entire span of the activity, spread
over 2 semesters, wherein the main focus shall be on self-learning.
6. A record in the form of an activity log-book is to be prepared by each team, wherein the team
can record weekly progress of work. The guide/supervi sor should verify the recorded
notes/comments and approve the same on a weekly basis.
7. The design solution is to be validated with proper justification and the report is to be compiled
in a standard format and submitted to the department. Efforts are to b e made by the students

to try and publish a technical paper, either in the institute journal, “Techno Focus: Journal for
Budding Engineers” or at a suitable publication, approved by the department research
committee/ Head of the department.
8. The focus should be on self-learning, capability to design and innovate new products as well
as on developing the ability to address societal problems. Advancement of entrepreneurial
capabilities and quality development of the students through the year long course should
ensure that the design and development of a product of appropriate level and quality is carried
out, spread over 4 semesters, i.e. during the semesters III to VI.
Guidelines for Assessment of the work:
1. The review/ progress monitoring committee shall be constituted by the Head of the Department.
The progress of design and development of the product is to be evaluated on a continuous basis,
holding a minimum of two reviews in each semester.
2. In the continuous assessment, focus shall also be on each individu al student’s contribution to
the team activity, their understanding and involvement as well as responses to the questions
being raised at all points in time.
3. Distribution of marks individually for the both reviews as well as for the first review during the
subsequent semester shall be as given below:
A. Marks awarded by the supervisor based on log-book : 20
B. Marks awarded by review committee : 20
C. Quality of the write-up : 10
Review/progress monitoring committee may consider the following points during the
assessment.
In the semester V, the entire design proposal shall be ready, including components/system
selection as well as the cost analysis. Two reviews will be conducted based on the
presentation given by the student’s team.
 First shall be for finalization of the product selected.
 Second shall be on finalization of the proposed design of the product.

The overall work done by the team shall be assessed based on the following criteria;
1. Quality of survey/ need identification of the product.
2. Clarity of Problem definition (design and development) based on need.
3. Innovativeness in the proposed design.
4. Feasibility of the proposed design and selection of the best solution.
5. Cost effectiveness of the product.
6. Societal impact of the product.
7. Functioning of the working model as per stated requirements.
8. Effective use of standard engineering norms.
9. Contribution of each individual as a member or the team leader.
10. Clarity on the write-up and the technical paper prepared.
The semester V reviews may be based on relevant points listed above, as applicable.

Guidelines for Assessment of Semester Reviews:
 The write-up should be prepared as per the guidelines given by the department.
 The design and the development of the product shall be assessed through a
presentation and demonstration of the working model by the student team to a
panel of Internal and External Examiners, preferably from industry or any
research organizations having an experience of more than five years, approved

by the Head of the Institution. The presence of the external examiner is desirable
only for the 2nd presentation in semester VI. Students are compulsorily required
to present the outline of the technical paper prepared by them during the final
review in semester VI.

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal