DJSCE - CSE (Data Science) syllabus document: Sem6_DJS22
(Scheme & Syllabus, Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering)

Scheme and Detailed syllabus (DJS22)
Third Year B.Tech
in
Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
(Semester VI)

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Term
Work
Total
DJS22DSC601 Machine Learning - III (Reinforcement Learning) 3 -- -- 3 2 65 -- -- -- 65 20 15 35 -- 35 100 3
DJS22DSL601 Machine Learning - III Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1
DJS22DSC602 Natural Language Text Processing 3 -- -- 3 2 65 -- -- -- 65 20 15 35 -- 35 100 3
DJS22DSL602 Natural Language Text Processing Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 2 -- 25 -- -- 25 -- -- -- 25 25 50 1
DJS22DSC603 Image Processing and Computer Vision - II 3 -- -- 3 2 65 -- -- -- 65 20 15 35 -- 35 100 3
DJS22DSL603 Image Processing and Computer Vision - II
Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 2 -- 25 -- -- 25 -- -- -- 25 25 50 1
4 DJS22DSL604 Programming Laboratory 2 2 -- 3 2 -- -- -- 50 50 -- -- -- 50 50 100 3 3
DJS22DSC6011 Cloud Computing 3 -- -- 3 2 65 -- -- -- 65 20 15 35 -- 35 100 3
DJS22DSL6011 Cloud Computing Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1
DJS22DSC6012 Recommender System 3 -- -- 3 2 65 -- -- -- 65 20 15 35 -- 35 100 3
DJS22DSL6012 Recommender System Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1
DJS22DSC6013 Embedded System & RTOS 3 -- -- 3 2 65 -- -- -- 65 20 15 35 -- 35 100 3
DJS22DSL6013 Embedded System & RTOS Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1
DJS22DSC6014 Computational Neuroscience 3 -- -- 3 2 65 -- -- -- 65 20 15 35 -- 35 100 3
DJS22DSL6014 Computational Neuroscience Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1
6 DJS22ILLL2 Innovative Product Development IV -- 2 -- 1 2 -- -- -- 25 25 -- -- -- 25 25 50 1 1
Total 14 12 0 20 16 260 50 0 75 385 80 60 140 175 315 700 20 20
@ Any 1 Elective Course
Prepared by Checked by PrincipalHead of the Department Vice Principal
Continuous Assessment (B)
Oral
&
Pract
Term
Test 1
(TT1)
Term
Test 2
(TT2)
Duration
Aggregate
(A+B)Theory
Semester End Examination (A)
Oral
CA
TotalTheory
(hrs.)
Practical
(hrs.)
Tutorial
(hrs.) Credits
Teaching Scheme
Scheme of Semester - VI for Department of Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)
Academic Year - 2024 - 2025
Pract
Sr Course Code Course
End
Sem
Exam
Total
Credits
Total
(TT1
&
TT2)
4
5@ 4
1 4
3
42

Continuous Assessment (A):

Course Assessment Tools Marks Time (hrs.)
Theory
a. One Term test (based on 40 % syllabus) 20 1
b. Second Term test (next 40 % syllabus ) /
presentation / assignment / course project / group
discussion / any other.

15 1

Average marks of a and b
35

--
Audit course
Performance in the assignments / qui / power point
presentation / poster presentation / group project /
any other tool.

--
As
applicable Laboratory Performance in the laboratory and documentation. 25
Tutorial Performance in each tutorial & / assignment. 25
Laboratory
&Tutorial
Performance in the laboratory and tutorial. 50

The final certification and acceptance of term work will be subject to satisfactory performance upon
fulfilling minimum passing criteria in the term work / completion of audit course.

Semester End Assessment (B):

Course Assessment Tools Marks Time (hrs.)
Theory /
* Computer
based
Written paper based on the entire syllabus.
65

2
* Computer based assessment in the college premises.
Oral Questions based on the entire syllabus. 25 as applicable
Practical Performance of the practical assigned during the examination
and the output / results obtained. 25 2
Oral &
Practical
Project based courses - Performance of the practical assigned
during the examination and the output / results obtained.
Based on the practical performed during the examination and
on the entire syllabus.

As per the
scheme

2

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement Learning) (DJS22DSC601)
Machine Learning – III Laboratory (DJS22DSL601)

Pre-requisite: Machine Learning-I, Machine Learning-II and Artificial Intelligence.
Course Objectives: To make students learn to build programs that act in a stochastic
environment, based on past experience using various Reinforcement Learning methods.
Outcomes: Students will be able to
1. Explain basic and advanced Reinforcement Learning techniques.
2. Identify suitable learning tasks to which Reinforcement learning and Deep
Reinforcement Learning techniques can be applied.
3. Apply appropriate Reinforcement Learning method to solve a given problem.

Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement Learning) (DJS22DSC601)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction:
Reinforcement Learning (RL), Elements of Reinforcement Learning, Reinforcement
Learning Vs Supervised Learning, Approaches of solving Reinforcement Learning: Value
based, policy based, model based, Exploration - Exploitation dilemma, Evolutionary
methods, Immediate Reinforcement Learning.
04
2
Immediate Reinforcement Learning:
Bandit Problems: Bandit problems, Value -action based methods (sample average),
Greedy method, €-greedy method, Incremental Implementation, Non -stationary problem,
Optimistic Initial values, UCB algorithm, Thompson Sampling.
Policy Gradient Approaches: Linear reward Penalty Algorithm, Parameterized policy
representation(Θ), Evaluation of policy(ɳ(Θ)), REINFORCE algorithm.
06
3
Full Reinforcement Learning:
Difference between Immediate and Full Reinforcement Learning, Agents and
Environment, Goals, Rewards, Returns, Policy in Full Reinforcement Learning, Episodic
and Continuing Tasks.
Markov Decision Process (MDP):
Markov Property, Finite Markov Decision Process, Value functions, Bellman’s equations,
optimal value functions, Definition of MDP in Reinforcement Learning, Solution of the
Recycling Robot problem
08
4
Dynamic Programing:
Policy evaluation, policy improvement, policy iteration, value iteration, Asynchronous
Dynamic Programing, bootstrap, full back up.
Monte Carlo Method:
Advantages of Monte Carlo over Dynamic Programing, Monte Carlo Control, on-policy,
off- policy, Incremental Monte Carlo, Issues/Assumptions in Monte Carlo Methods,
Solution of BlackJack using Monte Carlo Method.
08

5
Temporal Difference Learning:
What is Temporal Difference learning, Advantages of Temporal Difference methods over
Monte Carlo and Dynamic Programming methods, TD (0), On-policy vs off-policy,
SARSA, Q learning.
Eligibility traces:
N-step Temporal Difference methods, On-line vs Off-line updation, TD(𝛌): forward view,
backward view, Traces: Accumulating trace, Dutch trace, Replacing trace, Equivalence
of forward and backward view, SARSA(𝛌).
06

6
Deep Reinforcement Learning:
Function Approximation:
Drawbacks of tabular implementation, Function Approximation, Gradient Descent
Methods, Linear parameterization, Policy gradient with function approximation.
Deep Reinforcement Learning:
Intro of Deep Learning in Reinforcement Learning, Deep learning training workflow,
Categories of Deep learning, Deep Q -Network, Ways of improving Deep Q -Network,
REINFORCE in Full Reinforcement Learning, Actor -Critic Algorithm, A2C, A3C,
DDPG.
07
Total 39

Suggested List of Experiments:
Machine Learning – III Laboratory (DJS22DSL601)
Sr. No. Title of the Experiments
1
Bandit Problem:
 Implement Greedy and Epsilon greedy methods.
 Comparison between Greedy and Epsilon Greedy Policy
 UCB: Upper Confidence Bound
2
Policy Gradient (Convergence)
 Implement REINFORCE algorithm on a CartPole/ Lunar Lander.
3
Dynamic Programming and Monte Carlo Methods
 Implementation of GridWorld using Dynamic Programming
 Jack’s Car Rental using Dynamic Programming
 Gamblers Problem using Dynamic Programming
 BlackJack using Monte Carlo
 Race Track Problem
4
Temporal Difference
 Implement Frozen Lake using SARSA
 Implement Grid world using Q learning
5
Deep Reinforcement Learning
 Compare the performance of Reinforcement Learning and Deep Reinforcement Learning
on a Cart pole problem.
 Implementation of Deep Q-Network algorithm
 Actor Critic: Find the optimal policy using the Actor Critic method.
Minimum 10 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will
be included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.

*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignment/Quizzes
(10m).

Books Recommended:
Textbooks
1. Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto, “Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction”, MIT Press,
2nd Edition, 2018.
2. Laura Graesser Wah Loon Keng, “Foundations of Deep Reinforcement Learning,” Pearson
Education, 1st Edition, 2020.

Reference Books
1. Phil Winder, “Reinforcement Learning Industrial Applications of Intelligent Agents”,
O’Reilly, 1st Edition, 2020.
2. Csaba Szepesvari, “Algorithms for Reinforcement Learning,” Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 1st
Edition, 2019.
3. Enes Bilgin, “Mastering Reinforcement Learning with Python”, Packt publication, 1st Edition,
2020.
4. Brandon Brown, Alexander Zai, “Deep Reinforcement Learning in Action”, Manning
5. Publications, 1st Edition, 2020.
6. Micheal Lanham, “Hands-On Reinforcement Learning for Games,” Packt Publishing,
1st Edition, 2020
7. Abhishek Nandy, Manisha Biswas, “Reinforcement Learning: With Open AI,
TensorFlow and Keras using Python,” Apress, 1st Edition, 2018.

Weblinks:
1. NPTEL Course in Reinforcement Learning: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs75/preview
2. Reinforcement Learning Course (Stanford University):
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FgzM3zpZ55o
3. AI Games with Deep Reinforcement Learning: https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-teach-
an-ai- to-play-games-deep-reinforcement-learning-28f9b920440a
4. Deep Reinforcement Learning: https://www.v7labs.com/blog/deep-reinforcement-learning-guide

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Natural Language Text Processing (DJS22DSC602)
Natural Language Text Processing Laboratory (DJS22DSL602)

Pre-requisite: Machine Learning-I, Machine Learning-II, Foundations of Data Analysis, Statistics
for Data Science
Course Objectives:
To introduce basics of language computation fundamental through morphological computation,
syntax, semantic and discourse analysis. Apply these concepts to develop Computational Models
for Real World Applications
Outcomes: Students will be able to
1. Understand the pre-processing required for linguistic data types.
2. Apply appropriate pre-processing technique on linguistic data.
3. Analyze different Machine Learning and deep learning algorithms to develop applications
based on natural language processing.

Natural Language Text Processing (DJS22DSC602)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction:
Generic Natural Language Processing (NLP) system, levels of NLP, Knowledge in language
processing, Ambiguity in Natural language, stages in NLP, challenges of NLP, Applications
of NLP Machine Translation, Sentiment Analysis etc.
Text Processing:
Word Tokenization and Segmentation, Lemmatization, Bag of words, N -gram language
model, N-gram for spelling correction. Edit distance - Dynamic Programming Approach,
Weighted Edit Distance, Finding Dictionary Entries with Small Edit Distances, Noisy
Channel Model, Non-word errors Real-word errors. Evaluation of Language Models, Basic
Smoothing, Advanced Smoothing Models. Advanced: Perplexity’s Relation to Entropy.
05
2
Text Classification:
Text classification definition and datasets, Generative text classifiers (naive Bayes)
Discriminative text classifiers (logistic regression), Bag -of-words Generative Classifier,
BOW Discriminative Model , Multi -class Classification: Softmax , Gradient Descent,
Statistical significance testing, Dataset understanding and creation.
05
3
Recurrent Neural Networks:
Recurrent Neural Network ,RNNs as Language, RNNs for Sequence Classification, Stacked
Recurrent Neural network, Bidirectional RNNs, Managing Context in RNNs:Long Short
Term Memory (LSTMs) and gated Recurrent Unit(GRUs).
06
4
Computational Semantics and Semantic Parsing:
Vector Semantics:
Words and Vectors, Term Frequency -Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF), Word2vec,
Continuous Bag of Words, ELMO, Vector Visualizing Embedding’s, Semantic properties
of embedding’s, Bias and Embedding’s Evaluating Vector Models, Cosine for measuring
similarity, Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI), PPMI vector models.
Lexical Semantics:
Word Senses -Relations Between Senses, WordNet: A Database of Lexical Relations, Word
Sense Disambiguation Alternate WSD algorithms and Tasks.
07

5
Computational Morphology and Syntax Analysis:
Computational Morphology:
Morphological Processes, Morphological Analysis - Inflectional morphology &
Derivational morphology, Regular expression, Finite State Automata, Finite State
Transducer, Morphological parsing with FST, Lexicon free FST Porter stemmer , Two -
level Morphology.
Syntax Analysis:
Introduction to POS Tagging, Probabilistic Tagging, Markov Models, Hidden Markov
Models (HMM) for PO S Tagging, Conditional Random Fields (CRF), Named Entities and
Named Entity Tagging, Context -Free Grammars -Derivation, Constituency Parsing,
Dependency Parsing.
12
6
Discourse Coherence:
Coherence Relation, Discourse Structure Parsing, Centring and Entity-Based Coherence,
Global Coherence.
04
Total 39

Suggested List of Experiments:
Natural Language Text Processing Laboratory (DJS22DSL602)
Sr. No. List of Experiment
1 Perform Pre-processing steps in Natural language Processing (Tokenization, Stop Word
detection, Stemming and Lemmatization.
2 Implement Parts of Speech tagging using HMM
3 Implement word-embedding and TF-IDF vectors in Natural language Processing
4 Implement language model using Ngram language model
5 Generate recursive set of sentences using Context Free Grammar
Identify the word senses using "synset" in NLTK
6 Implement Spelling Check, Spelling Correction and Auto complete using Language models or
CFG.
7 Implement a Spam classifier in Natural Language Processing
8 Implement Fake News Classifier Using LSTM-Deep Learning in NLP
9 Implement a Sentiment Analysis in Natural Language Processing
10 Implement NLP application on Regional Language
11 Implement Question Answering in NLP
12 Implement Chatbot in NLP
13 Implement Information Retrieval for extracting Text from Webpages and Images
14 Mini Project
Minimum 10 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will
be included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Quizzes (10m).

Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Jurafsky and Martin, “Speech and Language Processing”, Prentice Hall, 3rd Edition, 2020.
2. Uday Kamath, “Deep Learning for NLP and Speech Recognition”, 1st Edition, 2019.

Reference Books:
1. Jelinek, F., “Statistical Methods for Speech Recognition”, The MIT Press, 2022.
2. Yuli Vasiliev “Natural Language Processing with Python and spaCy - A Practical Introduction”,
No Starch Press, 2022.
3. Sowmya Vajjala, Bodhisattwa Majumder, Anuj Gupta, Harshit Surana, “Practical Natural
Language Processing: A Comprehensive Guide to Building Real-World NLP Systems”, O'Reilly,
1st Edition, 2020.

Web Links
1. Virtual Lab: -https://nlp-iiith.vlabs.ac.in/
2. Virtual Lab:-http://vlabs.iitb.ac.in/vlabs
dev/vlab_bootcamp/bootcamp/The_Big_Bang_Nerds/index.html
3. Nptel Course: - https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105158

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Image Processing and Computer Vision – II (DJS22DSC603)
Image Processing and Computer Vision - II Laboratory (DJS22DSL603)

Pre-requisite:
1. Mathematics for Intelligent System
2. Machine Learning -I and II
3. IPCV -I

Objectives:
To introduce theory and computation related to imaging geometry, and scene understanding. Also, to
provide exposure to clustering, classification and deep learning techniques applied in computer vision.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, the learner will be able to:
1. Understand various data capturing methods.
2. Apply appropriate object detection and object segmentation methods.
3. Apply suitable method to analyze complex vision data.
4. Develop suitable vision model for prediction.
Image Processing and Computer Vision – II (DJS22DSC603)
Unit Description Duration
1

Camera Geometry Model: Basics of Real Aperture Camera, Lens as LSI System,
Geometric Projective, 2D Transformations, 3D Transformations, Homography
Computation, planar homography, Camera geometry, Stereo geometry, Linear Filtering,
Correlation, Convolution, Hierarchy of Transformations, Rotational Representation,
Weak perspective projection and orthographic projection, coordinate system, camera
parameters and camera calibration Algorithm.
06
2
Object Detection:
Two Stage/Proposal: Convolutional Neural Networks for Detection: R -CNN, Fast R-
CNN, Faster R-CNN, RFCN and Mask RCN; Architecture and Issues in each algorithm.
visualization of Kernels; Backprop-to-image/Deconvolution Methods;
One Stage/Proposal Free: YOLO, SSD, evaluation metrics (IoU, AP), Non -max
suppression YOLO Loss function, Variants of YOLO.
08
3
Face Recognition and Verification: Zero-shot, One-shot, Few-shot Learning; Siamese
Networks, Triplet Loss, Contrastive Loss, Ranking Loss; Attention Models in Vision,
Spatio-temporal Models, Action/Activity Recognition, Region -based convolutional
neural network, Semantic segmentation
06
4
Generative Models: Types of generative models: Implicit and Explicit density;
Generative Adversarial Network; Vanilla GAN, Mode Collapse in GAN, Conditional
GAN, DC GAN, GAN objective functions, JSD Divergence, EM Distance Least
Squares.
06
5
Object Segmentation: Semantic segmentation, Scene Parsing, semantic flow, Bilinear
Interpolation, Symmetry in Segmentation, Featured image pyramid, pixel-wise softmax,
PSPNet, FPN, UNet, clustering method for segmentation, Distance metrics( Euclidean,
Cosine, Hamming, Manhattan, Minkowski, Chebyshev, Jaccard, Haversine, Sorensen-
Dice), Linkage Types (Single, Average, Complete, Centroid).
07

6
Motion Analysis and action recognition: Introduction to motion analysis, Horn and
Shunck method, Lucas-Kanade algorithm for optical flow, Deep learning in optical flow
estimation. Motion models. Introduction to action recognition, Action classification,
Action localization. Spatio -Temporal Analysis, Dynamic Stereo; Motion parameter
estimation. Visual object tracking methods and its examples, multiple objects tracking
methods, Tomasi and Kanade Motion factorization algorithm, Applications of feature
point tracking: mosaicing, video stabilization, structure from motion.
06
Total 39

Suggested List of Experiments
Image Processing and Computer Vision - II Laboratory (DJS22DSL603)
Exp. Suggested experiments
1 Object Detection (CNN): Cancer Cells Detection using Medical Image Processing.
2 Object Detection (CNN): Comparative analysis of different CNN models on Image Dataset.
3 Object Detection (YOLO): Identifying vehicle from a Road Traffic CCTV video Footage.
4 Implement transfer learning using the models (CNN, YOLO, etc.).
5 Similarity-Based Image Matching Using Siamese Networks.
6 Fine-Grained Image Recognition for Subcategory Classification.
7 Face Recognition: Facial Key Point Detection, Face verification, Hybrid image formation for
identification of facial expression classification and detection.
8 GAN: Converting Black and white image into Colored image.
9 GAN: Deep fake Detection.
10 Image Segmentation: Image Categorization for a given Vision Dataset.
11 Motion Analysis: Spatio-Temporal Analysis for Body Postures.
12 Mini Project
Minimum of 6 experiments from the given list or add new experiments. At least one experiment on each: CNN,
YOLO, GAN, U-Net should be implemented.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Computer Based
Assessment/Mini Project (10m).

Books Recommended:
Text books:
1. Richard Szeliski, "Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications (2nd Edition)", Springer, 2022.
2. Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, "Deep Learning", MIT Press, 2019.
3. Benjamin Planche, Eliot Andres, "Hands-On Computer Vision with TensorFlow 2", Packt
Publishing, 2019.
4. Gonzalez, Rafael C., and Woods, Richard E., "Digital Image Processing (4th Edition)", Pearson,
2018.
5. Mark Nixon, "Feature Extraction and Image Processing for Computer Vision (3rd Edition)",
Academic Press, 2019.
6. Scott Krig, "Computer Vision Metrics: Survey, Taxonomy, and Analysis (2nd Edition)", Apress,
2019.

Reference Books:
1. Adrian Kaehler, Gary Bradski, "Learning OpenCV 4: Computer Vision with Python", O'Reilly
Media, 2019.

2. Richard Hartley, Andrew Zisserman, "Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision (2nd
Edition)", Cambridge University Press, 2020.
3. E. R. Davies, "Computer Vision: Principles, Algorithms, Applications, Learning (5th Edition)",
Academic Press (Elsevier), 2017.
4. Mohamed Elgendy, "Deep Learning for Vision Systems", Manning Publications, 2020.
5. Yeshwanth Reddy, Kishore Ayyadevara, "Modern Computer Vision with PyTorch", Packt
Publishing, 2020.
Web Links:
1. Virtual Lab on Vision and deep learning Lab, https://www.ee.iitb.ac.in/~viplab/
2. Virtual Lab on Computer Vision Laboratory https://www.iitk.ac.in/ee/computer-vision-lab
3. Course on Modern Computer Vision
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzWRmD0Vi2KVsrCqA4VnztE4t71KnTnP5
4. Coursera course on Advanced Computer Vision with TensorFlow
https://www.coursera.org/learn/advanced-computer-vision-with-tensorflow
5. Udemy course on Deep Learning and Computer Vision A-Z™: OpenCV, SSD & GANs | Udemy
6. Vision Lab: Computeer Vision http://cse.iitm.ac.in/lab_details.php?arg=NQ
7. Funded Projects on Computer Vision at NAVER LABS Europe
https://europe.naverlabs.com/research/computer-vision/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Programming Laboratory (DJS22DSL604)

Prerequisites: Core Java and OOP concepts.

Objective: The objective of this course is:
1. To familiarize students with advanced object-oriented concepts and design patterns in Java for
creating scalable applications.
2. To enable students to optimize data handling through the Java Collections Framework, generics,
and the Streams API.
3. To equip students with skills to design, build, and secure web applications using Spring and
Spring Boot frameworks, with a focus on database connectivity and microservices architecture.
Outcomes: On completion of the course, the learner will be able to:
1. Apply advanced object -oriented concepts and design patterns in Java to develop scalable and
maintainable solutions for real-world problems.
2. Optimize data processing and performance using the Java Collections Framework, Streams API,
and generics.
3. Build secure, database -driven web applications using Spring and Spring Boot, with an
understanding of microservices and RESTful web services.
Programming Laboratory (DJS22DSL604)
Unit Description Duration
1
Advanced Object-Oriented Concepts
Design Patterns: Introduction to design patterns: Singleton, Factory, Observer,
Strategy, Implementing design patterns in Java.
SOLID Principles: Understanding and applying SOLID principles for better
design, Examples and case studies.
Interfaces and Abstract Classes: Advanced uses of interfaces and abstract
classes, Default methods in interfaces (Java 8 and above).
05
2
Java Collections Framework and Advanced Streams
Collections: List, Set, Map, and Queue interfaces, ArrayList, LinkedList,
HashSet, Tree Set, HashMap, LinkedHashMap.
Generics: Introduction to generics in Java, Creating generic classes and methods
Bounded type parameters.
Java Streams: Introduction to Streams API (Java 8 and above), Creating streams
from collections, arrays, and I/O, Stream operations: map, filter, reduce, collect,
Parallel streams for performance optimization.
08
3
Java Reflection API
Introduction to Reflection: Understanding the Java Reflection API
Accessing and manipulating class properties at runtime.
Use Cases of Reflection: Creating instances of classes dynamically Inspecting
methods, fields, and annotations Use of Reflection in frameworks like Spring.
04

4
Java Database Connectivity (JDBC)
JDBC Overview: Connecting to databases using JDBC, Executing SQL queries
and managing results, ORM Frameworks.
Introduction to Object-Relational Mapping (ORM): Overview of Hibernate
and JPA,Creating a simple application using Hibernate.
04
5
Spring Framework
Introduction to Spring: Overview of Spring Framework features, Inversion of
Control (IoC) and Dependency Injection (DI).
Spring Core: Understanding Beans, Application Context, and Bean Lifecycle
Configuring Spring with XML and Java annotations.
Spring AOP (Aspect-Oriented Programming): Introduction to AOP concepts,
Creating and using aspects in Spring.
06
6
Spring Boot Framework
Introduction to Spring Boot: Understanding its purpose and advantages over
traditional Spring.
Setting Up Spring Boot Applications: Project structure and configuration.
Building RESTful Web Services: Creating REST APIs using Spring Boot.
Spring Data JPA: Introduction to database interactions and repository pattern.
Securing Spring Boot Applications: Basics of security in Spring Boot using
Spring Security.
Profiles and Configuration: Managing different environments and
configurations in Spring.
Spring Boot Actuator: Monitoring and managing Spring Boot applications.
Testing Spring Applications: Unit and integration testing with Spring Test
framework.
Micro services Architecture: Basics of microservices, using Spring Cloud.
12
Total 39

Suggested List of Experiments:
Programming Laboratory (DJS22DSL604)
Sr. No. List of Experiment
1 Implementation of Functional Interfaces, Comparable and Comparator
2 Implementation of Optional Class, Date/Time API.
3 Implementation of Annotations.
4 Implementation of Singleton Design Patterns.
5 Implementation of Structural Design Patterns & Behavioural Design Patterns.
6 Creating JDBC application
7 Implementation of different collection types (stacks, queues, vectors etc)
8 Creation of generic classes, methods
9 Use reflection API to examine or modify the behaviour of methods, classes, and interfaces at
runtime.
10 Using streams API to implement program logic by composing functions and executing them in a
data flow.
11 Create a Spring application configured with both XML and Java annotations.
12 Implement logging functionality using Spring AOP.
13 Create a Spring Boot application with Spring Data JPA for database interaction.

Minimum 10 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will be
included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (25m) and Computer Based
Assessment (25m).
Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Anita Seth, B.L. Juneja, “JAVA: ONE STEP AHEAD”, Oxford University Press, 1st Edition,
May 2017.
2. Patrick Niemeyer, Daniel Leuck, “Learning Java”, O'Reilly Media, Inc, 4th Edition, June 2013.
3. Mert Caliskan, Kenan Sevindik, Rod Johnson, Jürgen Höller “Beginning Spring”, Wrox
February 2015.

Reference Books:
1. Herbert Schildt, “Java: The Complete Reference”, 9th edition, McGraw Hill.
2. Uttam K. Roy, “Advanced Java Programming, Oxford University Press, 2015.

Weblinks:
1. Nptel Course: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_cs58/preview
2. Oracle links: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/collections/;
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jdbc/
3. Spring documentation: https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/index.html

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

DEPARTMENT ELECTIVES

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Cloud Computing (DJS22DSC6011)
Cloud Computing Laboratory (DJS22DSL6011)

Pre-requisite: System Fundamentals and Basic Networking

Objectives:
1. Understand the core principles of cloud computing, including parallel and distributed
computing concepts, and virtualization techniques.
2. Analyze the architecture of cloud computing, covering cloud service models, types of clouds,
and key migration strategies.
3. Explore Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) concepts, Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) services, and
their role in cloud infrastructure design and management.
4. Learn cloud-based storage solutions, Database as a Service (DBaaS) offerings, and cloud
security measures for data protection.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, the students will able to:
1. Demonstrate the ability to differentiate between parallel and distributed computing and
understand the role of virtualization in cloud environments.
2. Apply knowledge of cloud architecture to select appropriate cloud service models and types,
and perform effective cloud migrations.
3. Configure and manage VPCs, EC2 instances, and understand best practices for cloud
networking and instance management.
4. Implement cloud storage solutions, leverage DBaaS, and ensure robust cloud security using
industry-standard practices and AWS security services.
Cloud Computing (DJS22DSC6011)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction to Cloud Computing:
Principles of Parallel and Distributed Computing: Parallel vs. distributed
computing, Elements of parallel computing and Distributed Computing.
Virtualization: Characteristics of virtualized environments, Taxonomy of
virtualization techniques: hosted, bare -metal, Hypervisor and Xen Architecture,
Para virtualization with Compiler Support, CPU Virtualization, Ot her
Virtualizations: Storage, Network, Desktop and Application Server Virtualization,
Virtualization and cloud computing
06
2
Cloud Computing Architecture: The cloud reference model: SAAS, IAAS,
PAAS, Types of clouds: Public, Private Hybrid, Community, Economics of the
cloud, Open challenges.
Migrating Applications to the Cloud: Key aspects, cloud migration techniques,
phases during migration, cloud emulators.
06
3
Virtual Private Cloud (VPC):
Introduction to VPC and its benefits, Networking concepts within a VPC (subnets,
route tables, security groups) VPC peering and connectivity options, VPC design
best practices and considerations.
Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) Service:
Overview of EC2 and its role in cloud computing, EC2 instance types and families,
Provisioning and launching EC2 instances, configuring security groups and key
pairs, Managing EC2 instances (start, stop, terminate), Elastic IP addresses and
Elastic Network Interfaces (ENIs).
08

4
Cloud-Based Storage: Provisioning Cloud Storage, Exploring Cloud Backup
Solutions, Cloud Storage Interoperability
Database as a Service
Key advantages of Database as a service offering, Amazon S3, Elastic Block Store
(ESB), Amazon SimpleDB,
06
5
Understanding Cloud Security: Securing the Cloud: The security boundary,
Security service boundary, Security mapping, Securing Data: Brokered cloud
storage access, Storage location and tenancy, Encryption, Auditing and compliance,
Establishing Identity and Presence, Identit y protocol standards: Windows Azure
identity standards
Data Protection: protect data at rest and in transit, Identify Amazon Simple
Storage Service (Amazon S3) protection features, Encrypt data in Amazon S3,
Differentiate between client -side encryption (C SE) and server -side encryption
(SSE), Identify Amazon Web Services (AWS) services that help protect your data.
08
6
Administration for Clouds: The AAA model, single sign-on flor clouds, industry
implementation for AAA, authentication management standards for controlling
access, SAML, authorization management, accounting for resource utilization.
05
Total 39

Suggested List of Laboratory Experiments:
Cloud Computing Laboratory (DJS22DSL6011)
S No Name of Experiment
1
Virtualisation:
 Hosted Virtualisation
 Bare Metal Virtualisation
2 Host a Static Website on cloud.
3 Create and migrate relational database on cloud.
4 Create a Virtual Private Clouds and establish connections between each other.
5 Implement user level authentication on your cloud applications.
6 Implement Load balancing on your created cloud application.
7 Automate Infrastructure Development.
8 Implement serverless architecture and configure notification services.
9 Implement Hybrid storage and Data Migration.
10 Mini Project

Minimum 10 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will be
included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignment/Quizzes
(10m).

Books Recommended:
Text Books
1. Kailash Jayaswal, Jagannath Kallakurchi, Donald J . Houde, Dr. Deven Shah, “Cloud
computing Black Book” Dreamtech Publication, 2014.
2. Rajkumar Buyya,“Mastering Cloud Computing”, McGraw Hill Education, 2017
3. Ray Rafaels, “Cloud Computing: From Beginning to End,” CreateSpace Independent Publishing,
2015.

Reference Books
1. Temitayo Fagbola, Kamal Kant Hiran, “Cloud Computing: Master The Concepts, Architecture and
Applications with Real-World Examples And Case Studies”, BPB Publications, 2019.
2. Dr. Sunilkumar, S. Manvi, “Cloud Computing: Concepts and Technologies”, CRC Press, 2021
3. Ricardo Puttini, Thomas Erl, and Zaigham Mahmood, “Cloud Computing: Concepts, Technology
& Architecture,” Pearson Publication, 2013
4. Michael J Kavis,”Architecting the Cloud,” Wiley, 2014.
5. Thomas Erl, Zaigham Mahmood, “Cloud Computing: Concepts, Technology & Architecture”,
Pearson Education, 2014

Web Links:
1. A course on Cloud Computing: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs20/preview
2. A comprehensive guide to Social Network Analysis:
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/04/what-is-cloud-computing/
3. AWS Cloud Services: https://docs.aws.amazon.com//?nc2=h_ql_doc_do

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Recommender System (DJS22DSC6012)
Recommender System Laboratory (DJS22DSL6012)

Pre-requisite: Statistics for Data Science, and Machine Learning – I.

Course Objectives: To provide students with the basic concepts of Recommender Systems,
design space, trade-offs and its application in various domain.
Outcomes: Students will be able to
1. Compare different types of Recommender Systems.
2. Understand various issues related to recommender system development.
3. Design a recommender system for a given problem.
4. Relate data collected from a recommender system to understand user preferences and/or
behavior.
Recommender System (DJS22DSC6012)
Unit Description Duration
1

Introduction to Recommender Systems:
Recommender Systems Function, Techniques, Application and Evaluation,
Recommender Systems and Human Computer Interaction, Trust, Explanations
and Persuasiveness, Conversational Systems, Visualization, Biases in
Recommender Systems: Statistical, cultural and cognitive, data and algorithm
bias and self-selection biases, Issues working with RSs data sets: The cold-start
problem.
Recommendation System Properties:
User Preference, Prediction Accuracy, Coverage, Confidence, Trust, Novelty ,
Serendipity, Diversity, Utility, Risk, Robustness, Privacy, Adaptivity.
Performance evaluation of RSs Experimental settings:
Evaluation metrics: Rating prediction and accuracy, Ranking Measures: NDPM,
Spearman’s ρ, R -Score, MAP, NDCG, MRR, implicit/explicit. Other metrics:
fairness, coverage, diversity, novelty, serendipity.
09
2
Content-based Recommender System:
High level Architecture of Content-based Systems, Advantages and Drawbacks
of Content -based Filtering, Item profiles, discovering features of documents,
obtaining item features from tags, representing item profiles, Methods for
Learning User Profiles, Similarity base d retrieval, Classification algorithms,
Knowledge based recommendation: Knowledge representation and reasoning,
Case based recommenders.
05
3
Neighborhood-based Recommendation Methods:
Advantages of Neighborhood Approaches, Neighborhood -based
Recommendation, User -based Rating Prediction, User -based Classification
Regression Vs Classification, Item -based Recommendation, User -based Vs
Item-based Recommendation, Rating Normalization, Similarity Weight
Computation, Neighborhood Selection, Advance d Techniques:
Dimensionality Reduction Methods, Graph -based Methods, Feature selection.
Item representation, Methods for learning user profiles. Model based and
preprocessing based approaches, Attacks on collaborative recommender systems
06

4
Collaborative filtering-based Recommender System:
Baseline predictors through least squares, Implicit feedback, Matrix
factorization models: SVD, SVD++, Time -aware factor model, Comparison,
echo chambers, data drift and concept drift.
Neighborhood models:
Similarity measures, Similarity -based interpolation, jointly derived
interpolation weights. Global neighborhood model, Factorized neighborhood
model, Temporal models. Step -by-step solution of the RS problem. Temporal
dynamics at neighborhood models and Bet ween neighborhood and
factorization.
06
5
Constraint-based Recommenders:
Development of Recommender Knowledge Bases, User Guidance in
Recommendation Processes, Calculating Recommendations.
Context-Aware Recommender Systems Trust:
Context in Recommender Systems, Modeling Contextual Information in
Recommender Systems. Paradigms for Incorporating Context in Recommender
Systems: Contextual Pre - Filtering, Contextual Post -Filtering, Contextual
Modeling, Combining Multiple Approaches, Ad ditional Issues in Context -
Aware Recommender Systems.
07
6
Hybrid approaches:
Deep Recommender systems, Multimodal Recommenders, Monolithic
hybridization design: Feature combination, Feature augmentation, Parallelized
hybridization design: Weighted, Switching, Mixed, Pipelined hybridization
design: Cascade Meta-level, Limitations of hybridization strategies, deployment
of recommender systems for given timeframe/users/items, Testing and
Explainability in recommenders.
06

Suggested List of Experiments:
Recommender System Laboratory (DJS22DSL6012)
Sr. No. Title of the Experiment
1
Processing and analysis of public recommender systems datasets, and performance
evaluation
and comparison / Master spreadsheet-based tools.
2 Compare and analyze performance of Content-based recommendation engine on different
datasets for Book, Movie, Song, product Recommendation.
3
Implement Recommendation System using K-Nearest Neighbors and evaluate its
performance
on different dataset.
4 Build project-association recommenders using association rule mining.
5 Build a Recommendation Engine with Item-Based Collaborative Filtering.
6 Implement Context-Aware Recommender Systems Trust.
7 Build Constraint-based Recommenders to provide valuable support for users searching for
products and services in e-commerce environments.
8 Implement Hacker News algorithm /Subreddit User Recommendation System based on
Netflix's Algorithm.

9 Implement Bayesian personalized ranking using matrix factorization algorithm.
10 Implement Google PageRank algorithm for recommendation.
11 Implement unsupervised learning - Autoencoders and Restricted Boltzmann Machines.
12
Implement recommender systems in 5G wireless networks for optimizing wireless network
performance and deploy designed recommender System as Hosted Interactive Web Service
on AWS.
13 Mini Project
Minimum 10 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will
be included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignment/Quizzes
(10m).

Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Jannach D., Zanker M. and FelFering A., “Recommender Systems: An Introduction”, Cambridge
University Press, 1st Edition, 2011.
2. Kim Falk, “Practical Recommender Systems”, Manning, 1st Edition, 2019
3. Manouselis N., Drachsler H., Verbert K., Duval E., “Recommender Systems for Learning”,
Springer, 1st Edition, 2013.
4. C.C. Aggarwal, “Recommender Systems: The Textbook”, Springer, 1st Edition, 2016.
Reference Books:
1. M.D. Ekstrand, J.T. Riedl, J.A. Konstan, “Collaborative filtering recommender systems”, Now
publishers, 1st Edition, 2011.
2. J. Leskovec, A. Rajaraman and J. Ullman, “Mining of massive datasets”, Cambridge, 2 nd
Edition, 2012.
3. Rounak Banik, “Hands-On Recommendation Systems with Python: Start building”, Ingram
short title, 2018
4. P. Pa van Kumar, S. Vairachilai, Sirisha Potluri, “ Recommender Sy stems: Algorithms and
Applications”, CRC Press, 1st edition, 2021.
Web Links:
1. Udemy course on Recommender Systems and Deep Learning in Python:
2. https://realpython.com/build-recommendation-engine-collaborative-filtering
3. Coursera course on Recommender Systems Specialization:
https://www.coursera.org/specializations/recommender-systems

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Embedded Systems & RTOS (DJS22DSC6013)
Embedded Systems & RTOS Laboratory (DJS22DSL6013)

Pre-requisite courses: Microprocessors and Microcontrollers

Objectives: To study concepts involved in embedded hardware and software for system realization.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Identify and describe various characteristic features and applications of embedded systems.
2. Analyze and identify hardware for embedded system implementations.
3. Analyze and identify various software issues involved in embedded systems for real
time requirements.
4. Analyze and explain the design life-cycle for embedded system implementation.

Embedded Systems & RTOS (DJS22DSC6013)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction to embedded systems
Characteristics and Design metrics of Embedded system, Real time systems: Need
for Real-time systems, Hard-Soft Real-time systems., Challenges in Embedded
System Design: Power, Speed and Code density, Power supply considerations in
Embedded systems: Low power features-Idle & Power, down mode, Sleep mode,
and Brown-out detection
04
2
Embedded Hardware
Introduction to Embedded Architecture: Embedded cores, Types of memories,
Sensor Interface, Communication Interfaces: Comparative study of serial
communication interfaces (RS -232, RS-485), SPI, I2C, CAN, USB, Wired LAN
(Ethernet) (IEEE 802.3), Wireless LANs & Long Distance Comm. Wireless
Fidelity – LoRA Mesh. Selection criteria of above interfaces.
08
3
ARM Architecture: Comparative study of A, R & M series of processors with
introduction to different families and their capabilities - use cases. Understanding
the Cortex M0/0+, M3, M4, M33, M55 and M7 in terms of scalability from low
performance applications to base server a pplications and moving towards 64 -bit
architecture. Introducing Pipelining Concepts & basic instruction features such as
ARM Mode, Thumb and Thumb 2 mode, Instruction and Data Caches (Cortex-M7
and Cortex -A); FPU & MPU Coprocessors. Introducing the STM 32 F446 RE
Nucleo Board and its capabilities with sensor interfacing
08
4
Introduction to RTOS
Real-time Operating system: Need of RTOS in Embedded system software and
comparison with GPOS, Foreground/Background processes, Interrupt latency,
Task, Task- states, Multi-tasking, Context switching, Task scheduling, Scheduling
algorithms - Rate Monotonic Scheduling, Earliest Deadline First, Inter-process
communication, Semaphore, Mailbox, Message queues, Event timers, Task
synchronization- Shared data, Priority inversion, Deadlock. Memory Management,
Shared Devices and Mutex (Priority Inversion within it) Critical Code Sections
(Disable Scheduler temporarily).
08

5
Practical Implementation of RTOS Concepts with FreeRTOS:
Introduction to FreeRTOS: Overview of FreeRTOS and its features, Benefits of
using FreeRTOS in embedded systems. Setting up the STM32 F446 Nucleo Board
for FreeRTOS, Implementation of task scheduling . Con text switching in
FreeRTOS. Synchronization Mechanisms in FreeRTOS. Creating and using
semaphores. Managing memory in FreeRTOS. Demonstrating task
synchronization techniques (e.g., shared data management, priority inversion
handling).
06
6
System Integration, Testing and Debugging Methodology
Embedded Product Design Life-Cycle (EDLC), Hardware-Software Co-design
Testing & Debugging: Boundary-scan/JTAG interface concepts, Black-Box
testing, White-Box testing, hardware emulation, logic analyzer.
05
Total 39

Suggested List of Experiments:
Embedded Systems & RTOS Laboratory (DJS22DSL6013)
Sr. No Title of the Experiments
1 Introduction to STM 32 446 Nucleo Board & Getting started with Mbed
2 Introduction to the FRDM 64F Platform & Getting Started with Mbed
3 Porting, Compiling, Downloading & Running your first program – Blinky LED
4 Interfacing LCD, Speaker, Temperature Sensor & Accelerometer with Nucleo Board
5 Introduction to FreeRTOS and FreeRTOS Task Creation – Understanding the System
Core Clock
6 FreeRTOS Hello World App, Semi hosting & UART Setup
7 FreeRTOS App Debugging using Segger System View Tools
8 FreeRTOS Scheduler, Kernel Interrupts, RTOS Tick and SysTick Timer
9 FreeRTOS Context Switching & Task Notification and Task Deletions
10 FreeRTOS Queue Management, Semaphore for Synchronizations, Mutual Exclusion and
Memory Management
Minimum 6 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will be
included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignment/Quizzes
(10m).

Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Dr. K. V. K. K. Prasad, “Embedded Real Time System: Concepts, Design and Programming”,
Dreamtech, New Delhi, 2014.
2. Perry Xiao, “Designing Embedded Systems & Internet of Things with ARM mbed”, Wiley, 1st
Edition, 2018.
3. Sriram Iyer, Pankaj Gupta, “Embedded Real Time Systems Programming”, Tata McGraw Hill
Publishing Company ltd., 1st Edition, 2017.

Reference Books:
1. David Simon, “An Embedded Software Primer”, Pearson, 1st Edition, 2009.

2. Jonathan W. Valvano, “Embedded Microcomputer Systems–Real Time Interfacing”, Publisher-
Cengage Learning, 3rd Edition, 2012.
3. Andrew Sloss, Domnic Symes, Chris Wright, “ARM System Developers Guide Designing and
Optimising System Software”, Elsevier, 1st Edition, 2004
4. Frank Vahid, Tony Givargis, “Embedded System Design–A Unified Hardware/Software
Introduction”, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1st Edition, 2002.
5. Shibu K. V., “Introduction to Embedded Systems”, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private
Limited, New Delhi, 1st Edition, 2009.
Web Links:
1. A course on Embedded System Design with ARM:
https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105193/
2. A course on Real Time Operating System: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_cs16/preview
3. A course on Design of Internet of Things: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc21_ee85/preview

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Computational Neuroscience (DJS22DSC6014)
Computational Neuroscience Laboratory (DJS22DSL6014)

Pre-requisite: Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Statistics and Programming Skills.

Course Objectives:
This course aims to provide students with a strong foundation in the field of Cognitive Neuroscience, a
field that studies the intricate links between the mind, the brain, and behaviour . Students will learn
methods to replicate human behaviour of how to sense and perceive the world, act in it, learn and think
about it, and remember it.

Outcomes: Students will be able to:
1. Understand the computational neural structure
2. Illustrate coding and decoding models
3. Describe neural circuit and network models
4. Apply information theory concepts on Brain mapping

Computational Neuroscience (DJS22DSC6014)
Unit Description Duration
1
Introduction:
Descriptive model, Mechanistic model and Interpretive model, Properties of Neurons,
recording neuronal responses, Spike trains and firing rates: Measuring Firing Rates,
Tuning curves; Stimulus: The spike Triggered Average, White noise Stimuli, Multiple
Spike Triggered Averages and Spike Triggered correlations, Spike-Train Statistics –
Homogenous and Inhomogeneous Poisson Process, Auto correction Function, The
Poisson Spike Generator, The Neural Code
06
2
Neural Encoding:
Introduction to retina, LGN, V1, area 17, Techniques of neural data collection,
Reverse-Correlation Methods: Simple Cells, Spatial Receptive Fields, Temporal
Receptive Fields, Response of a simple cell to counterphase grating, Space -time
Receptive Fields; Linear Filtering, Non-linear input-output function, Basic encoding
model, Impact of PCA on encoding model, Non-linear representation with Gaussian,
Binomial and Poisson representation, The generalized linear model.
08
3
Neural Decoding:
Encoding decoding, Discrimination: ROC curves, The likelihood ratio test;
Population Decoding: optimal decoding method, Fisher Information; Spike -Train
Decoding
07
4
Information Theory:
Entropy and Mutual Information, Information and entropy maximization: for single
Neuron, populations of neurons; Utilization in Retinal Ganglion cell Receptive Fields-
Application, Entropy and information for spike trains
06
5
Model Neurons (Neuroelectronic):
Significance of Neuroelectronic in neuroscience, Neuronal Biophysics - Membrane
potentials, Single compartment models, Integrated and fire models, Voltage
dependent conductance, The Hodgkin- Huxley Model, Channel Simulation, Synaptic
Transmission Models, Synaptic Inputs to Integrate-and-Fire Models
06

Suggested List of Experiments:
Computational Neuroscience Laboratory (DJS22DSL6014)
Sr. No. Title of the Experiments
1. Introduction to EEG recordings. Theory, physiology, practical aspects of recording and
analysing scalp- recorded brain potentials.
2. Designing experiments: Control, manipulation, repeated trials, and balanced conditions.
Application to studies with brain recordings.
3. Experimental approach to studying the working human brain and body. How to use Brain
Voyager Brain Tutor. How to use the BESA dipole simulator.
4. Research design and the traditional statistical foundations of experimental research: T-test.
Analysis of variance. Evaluate sample data and data from a standard experiment.
5. Recording dense-array EEG: Practical introduction.
6. EEG analysis: How to get from the raw recording to brain waves. An example analysis.
7. Mini Project
Minimum 6 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will be
included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignment/Quizzes
(10m).

Books Recommended:
TextBooks
1. José Luis Bermúdez, “Cognitive Science: An Introduction to the Science of the Mind”,
Cambridge University Press, New York, 2nd Edition, 2014.
2. Jay Friedenberg, Gordon Silverman and Michael J. Spivey, “Cognitive Science: An
Introduction to the Study of Mind”, SAGE Publication, 4th Edition, 2021.
Reference Books
1. Michael Gazzaniga, Richard B Ivry, George R Mangun, “Cognitive Neuroscience the
Biology of the Mind,” W. W. Norton & Company Publication, 5th Edition, 2019.
2. Daniel Kolak, William Hirstein, Peter Mandik, Jonathan Waskan,” Cognitive Science: An
Introduction to Mind and Brain, Taylor and Francis, 1st Edition, 2006.

Weblinks:
1. Cognitive Science: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/cognitive-science/
2. Cognitive Neuroscience: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/cognitive-science/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

6
Network Models- Introduction - Importance of connectivity and dynamics, Firing-Rate
Models - Dynamics of average firing rates, Feedforward - Neural mapping, Recurrent
Networks: Linear and Nonlinear Recurrent Networks, Stability and oscillatory
dynamics.
06
Total 39

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Innovative Product Development-IV (DJS22ILLL2)

Course Objectives:
1. To acquaint the students with the process of identifying the need (considering a societal
requirement) and ensuring that a solution is found out to address the same by designing and
developing an innovative product.
2. To familiarize the students with the process of designing and developing a product, while they
work as part of a team.
3. To acquaint the students with the process of applying basic engineering fundamentals, so as
to attempt at the design and development of a successful value-added product.
4. To inculcate the basic concepts of entrepreneurship and the process of self-learning and
research required to conceptualise and create a successful product.

Course Outcome: On completion of the course, student should be able to:
1. Identify the requirement for a product based on societal/research needs.
2. Apply knowledge and skills required to solve a societal need by conceptualising a product,
especially while working in a team.
3. Use standard norms of engineering concepts/practices in the design and development of an
innovative product.
4. Draw proper inferences through theoretical/ experimental/simulations and analyse the impact
of the proposed method of design and development of the product.
5. Develop interpersonal skills, while working as a member of the team or as the leader.
6. Demonstrate capabilities of self-learning as part of the team, leading to life-long learning, which
could eventually prepare themselves to be successful entrepreneurs.
7. Demonstrate product/project management principles during the design and development work
and also excel in written (Technical paper preparation) as well as oral communication.

Guidelines for the proposed product design and development:
 Students shall convert the solution designed in semester 3 and 4 into a working model, using
various components drawn from their domain as well as related interdisciplinary areas.
 The working model is to be validated with proper justification and the report is to be compiled
in a standard format and submitted to the department. Efforts are to be made by the students to
try and publish the extended technical paper, either in the institute journal, “Techno Focus:
Journal for Budding Engineers” or at a suitable publication, approved by the department
research committee/ Head of the department.
 Faculty supervisor may provide inputs to students during the entire span of the activity, spread
over 2 semesters, wherein the main focus shall be on self-learning.
 A record in the form of an activity log -book is to be prepared by each team, wherein the team
can record weekly progress of work. The guide/supervisor should verify the recorded
notes/comments and approve the same on a weekly basis.
 The focus should be on self-learning, capability to design and innovate new products as well as
on developing the ability to address societal problems. Advancement of entrepreneurial
capabilities and quality development of the students through the year long course should ensure
that the design and development of a product of appropriate level and quality is carried out,
spread over two semesters, i.e. during the semesters V and VI.

Guidelines for Assessment of the work:
 The review/ progress monitoring committee shall be constituted by the Head of the
Department. The progress of design and development of the product is to be evaluated on a
continuous basis, holding a minimum of two reviews in each semester.
 In the continuous assessment, focus shall also be on each individual student’s contribution to
the team activity, their understanding and involvement as well as responses to the questions
being raised at all points in time.
 Oral examination should be conducted by Internal and External examiners. Students have to
give presentation and demonstration on their working model
 The distribution of marks for term work shall be as follows:
1. Marks awarded by the supervisor based on log-book: 10
2. Marks awarded by review committee: 10
3. Quality of the write-up : 05
The overall work done by the team shall be assessed based on the following criteria:
1. Quality of survey/ need identification of the product.
2. Clarity of Problem definition (design and development) based on need.
3. Innovativeness in the proposed design.
4. Feasibility of the proposed design and selection of the best solution.
5. Cost effectiveness of the product.
6. Societal impact of the product.
7. Functioning of the working model as per stated requirements.
8. Effective use of standard engineering norms.
9. Contribution of each individual as a member or the team leader.
10. Clarity on the write-up and the technical paper prepared.
11. The semester reviews (V and VI) may be based on relevant points listed above, as applicable.

Guidelines for Assessment of Semester Reviews:
 The write-up should be prepared as per the guidelines given by the department.
 The design and the development of the product shall be assessed through a presentation and
demonstration of the working model by the student team to a panel of Internal and External
Examiners, preferably from industry or any research organisations having an experience of
more than five years, approved by the Head of the Institution. The presence of the external
examiner is desirable only for the 2nd presentation in semester VI. Students are compulsorily
required to present the outline of the extended technical paper prepared by them during the
final review in semester VI.

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal