DJSCE - CSE (Data Science) syllabus document: Sem6_DJS23
(Scheme & Syllabus, Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering)

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Scheme and Detailed syllabus (DJS23)
Third Year B.Tech
in
Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
(Semester VI)

Theory
(Hrs)
Practical
(Hrs)
Tutorial
(Hrs) Credits Duration
(Hrs) Theory Oral Pract
Oral
&
Pract
SEE
Total
(A)
Term
Test 1
(TT1)
Term
Test 2
(TT2)
Term
Test 3
(TT3)
Term Test
Total (TT1
+ TT2+
TT3)
Term
Work
CA
Total
(B)
DJS23DCPC601 Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement
Learning) 3 -- -- 3 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100 3
DJS23DLPC601 Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement
Learning) Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1
DJS23DCPC602 Natural Language Text Processing 3 -- -- 3 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100 3
DJS23DLPC602 Natural Language Text Processing
Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 2 -- 25 -- -- 25 -- -- -- -- 25 25 50 1
3 DJS23DLPC603 Advanced Statistics Laboratory -- 4 -- 2 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 50 50 50 2 2
DJS23DCPE611 Time Series Analysis 3 -- -- 3 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE611 Time Series Analysis Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
DJS23DCPE612 Analysis of AI Algorithms 3 -- -- 3 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE612 Analysis of AI Algorithms Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
DJS23DCPE613 Medical Imaging Informatics and
Interoperability 3 -- -- 3 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE613 Medical Imaging Informatics and
Interoperability Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
DJS23DCPE614 Ethical Hacking and Digital Forensics 3 -- -- 3 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE614 Ethical Hacking and Digital Forensics
Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
DJS23DCPE616 Computer Vision 4 -- -- 4 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE616 Computer Vision Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
DJS23DCPE617 Robotics and AI 4 -- -- 4 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE617 Robotics and AI Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
DJS23DCPE618 Applied Game Theory 4 -- -- 4 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE618 Applied Game Theory Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
DJS23DCPE619 Information Security 4 -- -- 4 2 60 -- -- -- 60 15 15 10 40 -- 40 100
DJS23DLPE619 Information Security Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25
6 DJS23DLMD601 Applied Data Science Engineering
Laboratory -- 2 -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1 1
7 DJS23ICHSX10 Environmental Studies -- -- 1 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 1 1
8 DJS23IPSCX04 Innovative Product Development IV -- 2 -- 1 2 -- -- -- 25 25 -- -- -- -- 25 25 50 1 1
Total 13 14 1 22 12 240 25 0 25 290 60 60 40 160 200 360 650 22 22
Any one Programme Elective Course (PEC) from 4@ and 5@
1 4
2 4
4@ 4 4
Scheme of Semester VI (DJS23) for Department of Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)
5@ 5 5
Sr.

No.
Course Code Course
Teaching Scheme Semester End Examination (SEE) - A Continuous Assessment (CA) - B
Aggre
gate
(A+B)
Credits
Earned

Continuous Assessment (A):

Course Assessment Tools Marks Time (hrs.)

Theory
a. Term Test 1 (based on 40 % syllabus) 15 45
b. Term Test 2 (on next 40 % syllabus) 15 45
c. Assignment / course project / group discussion /
presentation / quiz/ any other. 10 --

Total marks (a + b + c)

40 --

Audit course
Performance in the assignments / quiz / power point
presentation / poster presentation / group project /
any other tool.

--

As
applicable Laboratory Performance in the laboratory and documentation. 25
Tutorial Performance in each tutorial & / assignment. 25
Laboratory
&Tutorial
Performance in the laboratory and tutorial. 50

The final certification and acceptance of term work will be subject to satisfactory performance upon
fulfilling minimum passing criteria in the term work / completion of audit course.

Semester End Assessment (B):

Course Assessment Tools Marks Time (hrs.)
Theory /
* Computer
based
Written paper based on the entire syllabus.
60

2
* Computer based assessment in the college premises.
Oral Questions based on the entire syllabus. 25 As applicable
Practical
Performance of the practical assigned during the examination
and the output / results obtained. 25 2

Oral &
Practical
Project based courses - Performance of the practical assigned
during the examination and the output / results obtained.
Based on the practical performed during the examination and
on the entire syllabus.

As per the
scheme

2

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
(Semester VI)

Third Year B.Tech. (DJS23)
Programme Core Courses

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI

Course: Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement Learning) (DJS23DCPC601)
Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement Learning) Laboratory (DJS23DLPC601)

Pre-requisite: Machine Learning-I, Machine Learning-II(Deep Learning) and Artificial Intelligence.

Objectives: To make students learn to build programs that act in a stochastic environment,
based on experience using various Reinforcement Learning methods.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Analyze basic and advanced Reinforcement Learning techniques.
2. Identify suitable learning tasks to which Reinforcement learning and Deep Reinforcement
Learning techniques can be applied.
3. Apply appropriate Reinforcement Learning method to solve a given problem.

Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement Learning) (DJS23DCPC601)
Unit Description Duration

1
Introduction:
Reinforcement Learning (RL), Elements of Reinforcement Learning, Reinforcement
Learning Vs Supervised Learning, Approaches of solving Reinforcement Learning:
Value based, policy based, model based, Exploration - Exploitation dilemma,
Evolutionary methods, Immediate Reinforcement Learning.

04

2
Immediate Reinforcement Learning:
Bandit Problems: Bandit problems, Value -action based methods (sample average),
Greedy method, € -greedy method, Incremental Implementation, Non -stationary
problem, Optimistic Initial values, UCB algorithm, Thompson Sampling.
Policy Gradient Approaches: Linear reward Penalty Algorithm, Parameterized policy
representation(Θ), Evaluation of policy(ɳ(Θ)), REINFORCE algorithm.

06

3
Full Reinforcement Learning:
Difference between Immediate and Full Reinforcement Learning, Agents and
Environment, Goals, Rewards, Returns, Policy in Full Reinforcement Learning,
Episodic and Continuing Tasks.
Markov Decision Process (MDP)
Markov Property, Finite Markov Decision Process, Value functions, Bellman’s
equations, optimal value functions, Definition of MDP in Reinforcement Learning,
Solution of the Recycling Robot problem

08

4
Dynamic Programing:
Policy evaluation, policy improvement, policy iteration, value iteration, bootstrap, full
back up.
Monte Carlo Method
Advantages of Monte Carlo over Dynamic Programing, Monte Carlo Control, on-
policy, off- policy, Issues/Assumptions in Monte Carlo Methods, Solution of BlackJack
using Monte Carlo Method.

08

5
Temporal Difference Learning:
What is Temporal Difference learning, Advantages of Temporal Difference methods
over Monte Carlo and Dynamic Programming methods, TD (0), On-policy vs off-policy,
SARSA, Q learning.
Eligibility traces
N-step Temporal Difference methods, On -line vs Off -line updation, TD (𝛌): forward
view, backward view, Traces: Accumulating trace Vs Replacing trace, Equivalence
of forward and backward view, SARSA (𝛌)

08

6
Deep Reinforcement Learning:
Function Approximation
Drawbacks of tabular implementation, Function Approximation, Gradient Descent
Methods, Policy gradient with function approximation.
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Intro of Deep Learning in Reinforcement Learning, Deep Learning training workflow,
Categories of Deep Learning, Deep Q-Network, Ways of improving Deep Q-Network,
REINFORCE in Full Reinforcement Learning, Actor -Critic Algorithm, A2C, A3C ,
DDPG. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO).

08
Total 42

Machine Learning – III (Reinforcement Learning) Laboratory (DJS23DLPC601)
Sr.
No Suggested experiments

1.
Bandit Problem:
 Implement Greedy and Epsilon greedy methods.
 Comparison between Greedy and Epsilon Greedy Policy
 UCB: Upper Confidence Bound
2.
Policy Gradient (Convergence)
 Implement REINFORCE algorithm on a CartPole/ Lunar Lander.

3.
Dynamic Programming and Monte Carlo Methods
 Implementation of GridWorld using Dynamic Programming
 Jack’s Car Rental using Dynamic Programming
 Gamblers Problem using Dynamic Programming
 BlackJack using Monte Carlo
 Racetrack Problem

4.
Temporal Difference
 Implement Frozen Lake using SARSA
 Implement Grid world using Q learning

5.
Deep Reinforcement Learning
 Compare the performance of Reinforcement Learning and Deep Reinforcement
Learning on a Cart pole problem.
 Implementation of Deep Q-Network algorithm
 Actor Critic: Find the optimal policy using the Actor Critic method.
 Analyze the effects of PPO’s clipping parameter and learning rate on policy stability and
convergence.
Minimum 10 experiments from the above-suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will be
included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
* The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m arks) and Quizzes/
Assignments (10marks).

Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto, “Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction”, MIT
Press, 2nd Edition, 2022.
2. Laura Graesser Wah Loon Keng, “Foundations of Deep Reinforcement Learning,”
Pearson Education, 1st Edition, 2020.

Reference Books:
1. Phil Winder, “Reinforcement Learning Industrial Applications of Intelligent Agents”,
O’Reilly, 1st Edition, 2020.
2. Csaba Szepesvari, “Algorithms for Reinforcement Learning,” Morgan & Claypool
Publishers, 1st Edition, 2019.
3. Enes Bilgin, “Mastering Reinforcement Learning with Python”, Packt publication, 1st
Edition, 2020.
4. Brandon Brown, Alexander Zai, “Deep Reinforcement Learning in Action”, Manning
5. Publications, 1st Edition, 2020.
6. Micheal Lanham, “Hands-On Reinforcement Learning for Games,” Packt Publishing,
1st Edition, 2020
7. Abhishek Nandy, Manisha Biswas, “Reinforcement Learning: With Open AI, TensorFlow
and Keras using Python,” Apress, 1st Edition, 2018.

Weblinks:
1. NPTEL Course in Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning - Course
2. Reinforcement Learning Course (Stanford University):
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FgzM3zpZ55o
3. AI Games with Deep Reinforcement Learning: https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-
teach-an-ai- to-play-games-deep-reinforcement-learning-28f9b920440a
4. Deep Reinforcement Learning: https://www.v7labs.com/blog/deep-reinforcement-learning-
guide

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI

Course: Natural Language Text Processing (DJS23DCPC602)
Natural Language Text Processing Laboratory (DJS23DLPC602)

Pre-requisite: Machine Learning-II(Deep Learning), Foundations of Data Analysis, Statistics for Data
Science

Objectives: To introduce basics of language computation fundamental through morphological
computation, syntax, semantic and discourse analysis. Apply these concepts to develop Computational
Models for Real World Applications.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Apply appropriate pre-processing techniques on linguistic data.
2. Analyze different Machine Learning and deep learning algorithms to develop
applications based on natural language processing.
3. Evaluate Natural Language Processing Applications.

Natural Language Text Processing (DJS23DCPC602)
Unit Description Duration

1
Introduction:
Generic Natural Language Processing (NLP) system, levels of NLP, Knowledge in
language processing, Ambiguity in Natural language, stages in NLP, challenges
of NLP, Applications of NLP Machine Translation, Sentiment Analysis etc.
Text Processing:
Word Tokenization and Segmentation, Lemmatization, Bag of words, N -gram
language model, N -gram for spelling correction. Edit distance – Dynamic
Programming Approach, Weighted Edit Distance, Finding Dictionary Entries
with Small Edit Distances, Noisy Channe l Model, Non-word errors Real-word
errors. Evaluation of Language Models, Basic Smoothing, Advanced Smoothing
Models. Advanced: Perplexity’s Relation to Entropy.

5

2
Computational Semantics and Semantic Parsing:
Vector Semantics:
Words and Vectors, Term Frequency -Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF),
Word2vec, Continuous Bag of Words, ELMO, GloVe Vector Visualizing
Embedding's, Semantic properties of embedding's, Bias and Embedding's Evaluating
Vector Models, Cosine for measuring sim ilarity, Pointwise Mutual Information
(PMI), PPMI vector models.
Lexical Semantics:
Word Senses -Relations Between Senses, WordNet: A Database of Lexical
Relations, Word Sense Disambiguation Alternate WSD algorithms and Tasks.

9

3
Text Classification:
Text classification definition and datasets, Generative text classifiers ( Naïve
Bayes) Discriminative text classifiers (Support Vector Machine), Bag-of-words
Generative Classifier, BOW Discriminative Model, Multi-class Classification:
Softmax, Gradient Descent, Statistical significance testing, Dataset understanding
and creation.

5

4
Recurrent Neural Networks:
Recurrent Neural Network, RNNs as Language, RNNs for Sequence Classification,
Stacked Recurrent Neural network, Bidirectional RNNs, Managing Context in
RNNs:
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTMs) and gated Recurrent Unit (GRUs).

7

5
Computational Morphology and Syntax Analysis:
Computational Morphology:
Morphological Processes, Morphological Analysis - Inflectional morphology &
Derivational morphology, Regular expression, Finite State Automata, Finite State
Transducer, Morphological parsing with FST , Lexicon free FST Porter stemmer,
Two - level Morphology.
Syntax Analysis:
Introduction to POS Tagging, Probabilistic Tagging, Markov Models, Hidden
Markov Models (HMM) for POS Tagging, Conditional Random Fields (CRF),
Named Entities and Named Entity Tagg ing, Context -Free Grammars -Derivation,
Constituency Parsing, Dependency Parsing.

12

6
Discourse Coherence:
Coherence Relation, Discourse Structure Parsing, Centring and Entity -Based
Coherence, Global Coherence.

4
Total 42

Natural Language Text Processing Laboratory (DJS23DLPC602)
Sr.
No Suggested experiments
1 Perform Pre-processing steps in Natural Language Processing (Tokenization, Stop Word
detection, Stemming and Lemmatization.
2 Implement Parts of Speech tagging using HMM
3 Implement word-embedding and TF-IDF vectors in Natural language Processing
4 Implement language model using Ngram language model
5 Generate recursive set of sentences using Context Free Grammar. Identify the word senses using
"synset" in NLTK
6 Implement Spelling Check, Spelling Correction and Auto complete using Language models or
CFG.
7 Implement a Spam classifier in Natural Language Processing
8 Implement Fake News Classifier Using LSTM-Deep Learning in NLP
9 Implement a Sentiment Analysis in Natural Language Processing
10 Implement NLP application on Regional Language
11 Implement Question Answering in NLP
12 Implement Chatbot in NLP
13 Implement Information Retrieval for extracting Text from Webpages and Images
14 Mini Project
Minimum 10 experiments from the above -suggested list or any other experiment based on syllabus will be
included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
* The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Quizzes (10m).

Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Jurafsky and Martin, "Speech and Language Processing", Prentice Hall, 3rd Edition, 2020.
2. Uday Karnath, "Deep Learning for NLP and Speech Recognition", 1'1 Edition, 2019.

Reference Books:
1. Jelinek, F., "Statistical Methods for Speech Recognition", The MIT Press, 2022.
2. Yuli Vasiliev "Natural Language Processing with Python and spaCy - A Practical Introduction", No
Starch Press, 2022.
3. Sowmya Vajjala, Bodhisattwa Majumder, Anuj Gupta, Harshit Surana, "Practical Natural Language
Processing: A Comprehensive Guide to Building Real-World NLP Systems", O'Reilly, 1st Edition,
2020.

Web Links
1. Virtual Lab: https://nlp-iith.vlabs.ac.in/
2. Virtual Lab:
http://vlabs.iitb.ac.in/vlabs/dev/vlab_bootcamp/bootcamp/The_Big_Bang_Nerds/index.html
3. Nptel Course: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105158

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Advanced Statistics Laboratory (DJS23DLPC603)
Pre-requisite: Statistics for Data Science, Python and Machine Learning.

Objectives: This course introduces the theoretical and computational foundations of statistical
inference, covering parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, and model diagnostics. It integrates
classical, Bayesian, and nonparametric approaches with resampling and model assessment
techniques to enable robust, data-driven decision-making.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Derive and evaluate estimators under classical and Bayesian paradigms.
2. Conduct and interpret hypothesis tests for linear and logistic regression models.
3. Apply nonparametric testing methods when parametric assumptions fail.
4. Critically assess model performance and generalization.
5. Integrate statistical reasoning with computational implementation.

Advanced Statistics Laboratory (DJS23DLPC603)
Unit Description Duration
1
Estimation Theory Fundamentals:
 Estimation of Parameters using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) and
Method of Moments
 Estimate μ for a Normal (μ, σ²) using MLE and compute Cramér–Rao Lower
Bound (CRLB).
 Derive MLE for Bernoulli(p), Normal Distributions and analyze estimator
properties.
06
2
Linear Regression Inference & Hypothesis Testing:
 Fit and Evaluate a Simple Linear Regression Model using t -test, F-test, and
Confidence Intervals for Coefficients.
 Compare Nested and Non-Nested Regression Models using Likelihood Ratio,
AIC, and BIC Criteria.
04
3
Regression Diagnostics and Model Assumptions:
 Perform Regression Diagnostics: Multicollinearity (VIF) and Normality Tests
on Residuals.
 Detect and Correct Heteroscedasticity using Breusch–Pagan Test, White Test,
and Log/Weighted Least Squares Transformations.

04
4
Logistic Regression and GLMs:
 Estimate and Interpret Logistic Regression Coefficients, Odds Ratios, and
Model Fit using Hosmer–Lemeshow Test and Pseudo-R².
 Extend Logistic Regression to Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) using
Different Link Functions and Evaluate Model Deviance.

06
5
Multinomial Logistic and Generalized Models:
 Model Count Data using Poisson Regression under the Generalized Linear
Models (GLMs) Framework.
 Fit and Interpret Multinomial and Ordinal Logistic Regression Models.
06

 Compare Logit and Probit Link Functions within the Exponential Family of
GLMs.
6
Nonparametric Hypothesis Testing:
 Compare Two Independent Samples using Mann –Whitney U and Wilcoxon
Rank-Sum Tests.
 Perform Goodness-of-Fit Testing using Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Chi-Square
Tests.
 Construct Bootstrap-Based Confidence Intervals and Conduct Nonparametric
Inference.
06
7
Bayesian Inference:
 Perform Bayesian Estimation for Normal and Binomial Models using
Conjugate Priors and Credible Intervals.
04
8
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) Techniques:
 Implement MCMC Methods (Metropolis–Hastings and Gibbs Sampling) for
Posterior Inference using PyMC/Stan.
 Analyze Convergence Diagnostics and Visualize Posterior Distributions
using Trace and Density Plots.
04
9
Advanced Bayesian Methods
 Perform Bayesian Regression
 Model Comparison using Posterior Predictive Checks and Information
Criteria
 Model Comparison (e.g., WAIC, LOO).
02
10
Bayesian Hypothesis Testing:
 Bayes Factors (BF₁₀ and BF₀₁)
 Posterior Odds vs. Prior Odds
 Evidence Interpretation Scale (Jeffreys scale)
 Bayesian One-Sample & Two-Sample Tests (Mean difference)
 Bayesian A/B Testing (Beta-Binomial model)
 Hypothesis Testing using Credible Intervals
02
11
Uncertainty Quantification and Resampling:
 Integrate Frequentist, Bayesian, and Resampling Approaches using Cross -
Validation, Bootstrapping, and Permutation Methods.
 Quantify Uncertainty through Confidence vs. Credible Intervals and Posterior
Predictive Checks.
06
12
High-Dimensional Inference
 Perform High-Dimensional Inference with Multiple Testing Corrections
 Bonferroni
 Benjamini–Hochberg FDR.
02
13
Causal Inference, and Regularization Techniques:
 Apply Causal Inference and Regularization Methods:
 Propensity Scores
 Instrumental Variables
 Ridge, Lasso, and Elastic Net.
04
Total 56
* The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15marks), Computer based
Assessment (25 Marks) and Quizzes/ Assignments (10marks).
Books Recommended:
Text Books
1. G. Casella & R. L. Berger, Statistical Inference, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning (2021).

2. Gelman, J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, D. B. Dunson, A. Vehtari, and D. B. Rubin, Bayesian Data
Analysis, CRC Press, 4rd Edition, 2025.
3. B. Efron and R. J. Tibshirani, An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Chapman & Hall/CRC, Reprint
Edition, 2003.
4. Agresti, Categorical Data Analysis, Wiley, 3rd Edition, 2013.
Reference Books
1. G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, An Introduction to Statistical Learning with
Applications in R, Springer, 2nd Edition, 2021.
2. C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006.
3. R. McElreath, Statistical Rethinking: A Bayesian Course with Examples in R and Stan, CRC Press,
2nd Edition, 2020.
4. C. Davison and D. V. Hinkley, Bootstrap Methods and Their Application, Cambridge University
Press, Reprint Edition, 2006.
Web Links:
1. L. Wasserman, All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical Inference, Springer, 2004.
All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical Inference | SpringerLink
2. Bayesian Data Analysis in Python Course with Datacamp.
Data Analytics A-Z with Python | Udemy

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
(Semester VI)

Third Year B.Tech. (DJS23)
Programme Elective Courses
SET I

Program: B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Time Series Analysis (DJS23DCPE611)
Time Series Analysis Laboratory (DJS23DLPE611)

Pre-requisite: Probability, Statistics and Linear Models.

Objectives: Learn basic analysis of time series data; concepts in time series regression, auto-
regressive and model averaging models , learn basic concepts of spectral analysis and space -time
models.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able
1. Interpret a correlogram and a sample spectrum
2. Apply appropriate model for a time series dataset.
3. Compute forecasts for a variety of linear and non-linear methods and models.

Time Series Analysis (DJS23DCPE611)
Unit Description Duration

1
Introduction
Types of forecasting methods, Types of Time Series, simple descriptive techniques,
trends in time series (Parametric trends, differencing, nonparametric methods, noise),
seasonality.
Stationary Time Series
Formal definition of a time series, the sample mean and its standard error, Stationary
processes: types of stationarity, statistical inference of time series.

06

2
Linear Time Series
Motivation, Linear time series and moving average models, The AR model,
simulating from an autoregressive process, The ARMA model, The ARIMA model,
Unit roots, integrated and non -invertible processes, Box – Jenkins Model Selection,
Seasonality, The SARIMA model.

06

3
Prediction
Using prediction in estimating, forecasting for autoregressive processes, forecasting
for AR, forecasting for general time series using infinite past, One-step ahead
predictors based on the finite past: Levinson -Durbin algorithm; Forecasting for
ARMA processes, State space model, The Kalman filter.
Automated Forecasting Systems: Auto-ARIMA, Auto Prophet, Auto ML for time
series, Integration of Auto ML and Hashing for Time Series Forecasting.

08

4
Models with Trend
Removing trend, Unit Root and Regression Residuals, The Monte Carlo Method,
Dickey-Fuller tests.
Multi equation Time Series Models
Intervention Analysis, ADLs and Transfer Functions, Introduction to VAR , Vector
Error Correction Model (VECM), Structural VAR (SVAR), Time-Varying Parameter
VAR, Bayesian VAR (BVAR)

10

5
Multivariate Time Series
Background: Sequences and Functions, Convolution, Spectral Representations and
mean squared errors; Multivariate time series regression: Conditional independence,
Partial correlation and coherency between time series.

06

6
Non Linear Time series
The ARCH model: Feature of an ARCH, Existence of a strictly stationary solution,
The GARCH model: Existence of stationary solution of a GARCH(1,1) and Bilinear
models: Bilinear auto regression model(BAR) , Advanced Nonlinear Models:
Stochastic Volatility (SV) models, Nonlinear Autoregressive Models (NAR, NARX)

06
Total 42

Time Series Analysis Laboratory (DJS23DLPE611)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1. Time Series Characteristics: Time Series Data, Cross-Section Data, Panel data/ Longitudinal data
2. Trends: (1) Detecting trends using Hodrick -Prescott Filter.
(2) Detrending a Time Series

3.
Seasonality: (1) Multiple Box Plots
(2) Autocorrelation Plot
(3) Deseasoning of Time-Series Data
(4) Seasonal Decomposition
(5) Detecting Cyclic Variations
4. Data Wrangling and Preparation for Time Series Data
5. Smoothing Methods: Simple exponential, Double exponential and Triple exponential.
6. Making Data Stationary: Plots, Summary Statistics, Statistics Unit Root Tests, Augmented
Dickey –
Fuller Test.
7. Automated Forecasting Systems using Auto-ARIMA.
8 Prophet, AutoML
9 Multivariate Time Series Analysis using VAR,VECM,SVAR modeling
10 Evaluation and Model Selection for Time Series Forecasting (Compare ARIMA vs XGBoost vs
other candidate models using metrics like RMSE, MAE, and MAPE)
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Quizzes/ Assignments
(10m).

Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. Walter Enders,” Applied Econometric Time Series,” Fourth Edition, Wiley, 2014.
2. B. V. Vishwas and Ashish Patel, “Hands-on Time Series Analysis with Python,” First Edition,
Apress, 2020

Reference Books:
1. Chris Chatfield, “Time- Series Forecasting,” First Edition, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2001.
2. Douglas C. Montgomery, Cheryl L. Jennings and Nurat Kulahci, “Introduction to Time
Series Analysis and Forecasting,” Second Edition, Wiley, 2015.
3. Aileen Nielsen, “Practical Time Series Analysis,” O’Reilly, 2019.
4. James D Hamilton, “Time Series Analysis,” Princeton University Press, 1994.
5. Robert H. Shumway and David S. Stoffer, “Time Series Analysis and Its Applications,”
Springer, 2000.

Web Links:
1. A course on Time Series Analysis. Course Dashboard | Time Series Analysis
2. A comprehensive guide to Time Series Analysis. Time Series Analysis: Definition,
Components and Examples
3. The Complete Guide to Time Series Analysis and Forecasting.
https://towardsdatascience.com/the-complete- guide-to-time-series-analysis-and-
forecasting-70d476bfe775

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI

Course: Analysis of AI Algorithms (DJS23DCPE612)
Analysis of AI Algorithms Laboratory (DJS23DLPE612)

Pre-requisite: Data Structures, Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Machine Learning

Objectives: The course aims to develop analytical skills to understand algorithmic foundations,
complexity, and performance trade -offs in designing efficient intelligent systems. It also equips
students to apply, analyze, and evaluate data structures, optimization, probabilistic, randomized, and
approximation algorithms for solving computationally complex AI problems effectively.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Analyze algorithmic and computational complexity foundations, including time–space trade-
offs and machine-learning model complexities during training and testing phases.
2. Apply various searching, indexing, and data -structuring techniques such as hash -based
search, trees, graphs, and spatial indices to develop efficient retrieval and reasoning systems
in AI.
3. Evaluate advanced optimization, probabilistic, randomized, and approximation algorithms to
address complex AI problems considering efficiency, convergence, and scalability aspects.

Analysis of AI Algorithms (DJS23DCPE612)
Unit Description Duration

1
Algorithmic and Complexity Foundations:
Review of algorithm analysis: Time and space complexity
Complexity classes: P, NP, NP-hard, NP-complete
Trade-offs in AI algorithm design (accuracy, scalability, efficiency)
Complexity Analysis of Machine Learning Algorithms:
i. Training Time Complexity and Testing Time Complexity
ii. Train/Test Complexity of Linear Regression
iii. Train/Test Complexity of Random Forest
iv. Train/Test Complexity of Naïve Bayes Classifier
v. Train/Test Complexity of SVM

04

2
Searching and Indexing for AI:
Linear, Binary, Hash-based Searching, Heuristic Search , Search problems:
Sliding tile puzzles, the Rubik’s Cube, Sokoban, Inverted index and TF-IDF
Vector space models and similarity search.
High-dimensional indexing: KD -Trees, Ball Trees , Approximate Nearest
Neighbor (ANN) search and LSH , Modern AI retrieval systems - IVF,
FNSW/HNSW (FAISS, Annoy, ScaNN).

06

3
Graphs and Trees in AI:
Flow networks and Ford –Fulkerson algorithm , Bipartite matching and
Hungarian algorithm, Minimum spanning trees and disjoint sets.
Tries, Tango tree, R Tree, Splay Tree, 2-3 Tree, Max spanning Tree, Binomial
tree, and Binomial Heap, Operations on binomial heap.

08

4
Optimization Algorithms:
Kernel Trick, Advanced First-Order Optimization Methods: Momentum and
Gradient Methods (MGD, NAG, AdaGrad, RMSProp)
Quasi Newton’s Method, Hessian Approximation. (BFGS / L-BFGS)
Swarm-based algorithms: PSO, ACO, GA, Differential Evolution
Exploration vs. exploitation, convergence, and complexity trade-offs

12

5
Probabilistic & Randomized Algorithms:
Probabilistic data structures: Bloom Filters, Count-Min Sketch, LogLog and
HyperLogLog, random projections, and the Johnson–Lindenstrauss Lemma
Randomized Algorithms: Monte Carlo and Las Vegas algorithm,
Randomized gradient methods , Randomized matrix algorithms and
sketching, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), Gibbs sampling.

06

6
Approximation Algorithms:
Approximation ratios and performance bounds , Low-rank matrix
decomposition (SVD, PCA, NMF), Semi-definite programming and convex
relaxations
Applications in recommendation systems and clustering

06
Total 42

Analysis of AI Algorithms Laboratory (DJS23DLPE612)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1 Analyze and demonstrate how kernel functions map data to higher dimensions for better
separability.
2 Analyze the implementation of Gradient Descent, Momentum, and Nesterov Accelerated
Gradient (NAG) and compare their convergence speeds.
3 Analyze the Ford–Fulkerson algorithm by implementing it for a given flow network and
evaluating how it determines the maximum flow.
4 Analyze Quasi-Newton optimization by implementing it and comparing its convergence
behavior against first-order methods.
5 Analyze swarm-based optimization algorithms through implementation and evaluation of
their search dynamics.
6 Analyze the structure of a 2–3 tree by implementing insertion, split, and deletion operations
and validating balancing invariants under random inputs.
7 Analyze an R-Tree by designing and implementing it for multidimensional spatial indexing
and evaluating its performance on range and nearest-neighbor queries.
8 Analyze Binomial Trees of various orders by constructing them and verifying their
structural properties.
9 Analyze a randomized rounding algorithm by implementing it and evaluating its
approximation quality.
10 Analyze differences between Monte Carlo and Las Vegas algorithms by implementing
them on a sample problem and comparing probabilistic accuracy and runtime behavior.
11 Analyze the MAX-CUT problem by applying SDP relaxation and randomized rounding to
evaluate approximation performance.
12 Analyze low -rank approximation techniques such as SVD, Tucker, or Tensor Train
decomposition by implementing them and examining reconstruction error.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m arks) and Assignments/Quizzes
(10marks).

Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Sanjoy Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou, Umesh Vazirani, ‘Algorithms’, Tata McGraw-
Hill, 1st Edition, 2023.
2. Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein,
“Introduction to Algorithms”, 4th Edition, The MIT Press, 2022.
3. Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques — Daphne Koller & Nir Friedman,
2018.

Reference Books:
1. Approximation Algorithms — Vijay V. Vazirani, 2021 (New edition).
2. Search Engines: Information Retrieval in Practice — Bruce Croft, Donald Metzler & Trevor
Strohman, 3rd Edition, 2019.
3. Randomized Algorithms - Rajeev Motwani & Prabhakar Raghavan, 2020

Web Link
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/advanced-algorithms-and-complexity
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs64/preview

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI

Course: Medical Imaging Informatics and Interoperability (DJS23DCPE613)
Medical Imaging Informatics and Interoperability Laboratory (DJS23DLPE613)

Pre-requisite: Machine Learning, Cloud Computing and Security

Objectives: To equip students with the skills to understand medical imaging and digital pathology
workflows, apply interoperability standards like HL7 v2.x, FHIR, and DICOM, and evaluate
enterprise imaging systems including PACS, VNA, RIS, LIS, and Mirth Connect. Students will also
learn to manage imaging data using DICOMweb and cloud platforms, and apply data science and AI
methods for imaging analytics, digital pathology, and workflow integration.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Describe the structure, components, and workflows of medical imaging and digital
pathology systems.
2. Apply healthcare interoperability standards such as HL7 v2.x, FHIR, and DICOM for
accurate and secure data exchange.
3. Design imaging data pipelines using Mirth Connect, PACS, VNA, and cloud -based
DICOMweb services.
4. Analyze medical imaging and digital pathology datasets using data science and AI
techniques, including federated learning workflows.

Medical Imaging Informatics and Interoperability (DJS23DCPE613)
Unit Description Duration
1
Modalities in Medical Imaging
Overview of medical imaging modalities (Radiology, Cardiology, Pathology):
X-ray, XA, mammography, CT, MRI, PET, Ultrasound, Echocardiogram, Whole slide
imaging (WSI).

06
2
Healthcare Interoperability and Data Exchange Standards
HL7 v2.x messaging: ADT, ORM, ORU, SIU, MDM, DFT, BAR, RDS, RDE, ACK
Medical Coding & Terminology Standards : LOINC, SNOMED CT, ICD, CPT,
Healthcare API Standards, API Workflow in Healthcare, Challenges in Healthcare
API Adoption.

10
3
DICOM and Imaging Data Standards
DICOM architecture, DICOM file format, SOP classes, DIMSE operations (C-ECHO,
C-STORE, C-FIND, C-MOVE). DICOM association, metadata, IODs.
PACS workflow using DICOM
DICOM for Digital Pathology (VL Whole Slide Microscopy Image IOD).

08
4
DICOMweb & Cloud Imaging
JSON and REST -based imaging workflows, DICOM web services (WADO-RS,
STOW-RS, QIDO-RS).
AWS Health Imaging, S3, Sage Maker, IAM – DICOM storage and AI integration.
GCP Healthcare API, Vertex AI, Big Query – DICOM web and FHIR interoperability.
Azure Health Data Services, Blob Storage, Power BI – secure imaging workflows.

08

5

Enterprise Imaging Systems
Imaging workflow and personas: Radiology, cardiology and pathology workflows,
PACS, RIS, LIS, VNA, HIS, viewer, WSI scanner
PACS and VNA architectures. IHE profiles – SWF, PIR, XDS-I.

04

6

AI in Medical Imaging:
Imaging datasets (DICOM, NIFTI, Pathology data), federated learning, MonAI
models and integrate in imaging workflow, Data anonymization

06
Total 42

Medical Imaging Informatics and Interoperability Laboratory (DJS23DLPE613)
Sr.
No
Suggested experiments
1 Deploy a cloud-hosted PACS using Orthanc on AWS and verify DICOM C -STORE and C-
FIND operations.
2 Configure DICOM Web endpoints on Azure and perform QIDO-RS, WADO-RS, and STOW-
RS operations using REST tools.
3 Launch OHIF viewer on GCP and integrate with Orthanc to visualize CT/MRI studies and
annotations.
4 Use Google Cloud Healthcare API to create a DICOM datastore, upload studies, run QIDO
queries, and export metadata to Big Query.
5 Simulate a Radiology workflow using Mirth Connect by sending HL7 ADT and ORM
messages to Orthanc and generating a DICOM worklist.
6 Convert Whole Slide Image (WSI) files to DICOM -VL format, upload to Orthanc, and view
multi-resolution tiles in OHIF pathology mode.
7 Implement Federated Learning for medical imaging using Flower/NVFlare and train a shared
CNN model without sharing raw data.
8 Train a MONAI-based UNet on MRI tumor segmentation data, export the trained model, and
deploy an inference API using FastAPI.
9 Deploy MONAI Label and perform AI -assisted interactive annotation on CT/MRI studies
using 3D Slicer or OHIF.
10 Mini Project
* The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Quizzes/ Assignments
(10m).

Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. Tim Benson & Grahame Grieve, Principles of Health Interoperability: HL7, FHIR, and SNOMED,
Springer, 2021.
2. Darren Treanor & Keith J. Dreyer, Digital Pathology: Current Practices and Future Directions,
Springer, 2021.
3. Barton F. Branstetter, Practical Imaging Informatics: Foundations and Applications for PACS
Professionals, Springer, 2021.

4. H.K. Huang, PACS and Imaging Informatics: Basic Principles and Applications, Wiley -
Blackwell, 2010.
5. Oleg S. Pianykh, Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM): A Practical
Introduction and Survival Guide, Springer, 2012.

Reference Books:
1. HL7 International, HL7 v2.x and FHIR Specifications, Available at: www.hl7.org, 2024.
2. IHE International, IHE Technical Frameworks (Radiology, IT Infrastructure, Pathology), 2024
3. NEMA, DICOM Standard (PS3.1–PS3.20) and Supplement 145: Whole Slide Imaging, National
Electrical Manufacturers Association, 2023.
4. Daniel Rueckert et al., Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis, Academic Press, 2020.
5. Maier, A., Steidl, S., Christlein, V., & Hornegger, J. (Eds.). (2018). Medical Imaging Systems: An
Introductory Guide. Springer.
6. George C. Kagadis & Steve G. Langer, Informatics in Medical Imaging, CRC Press, 2011.
Web Links:
1. Health Informatics Specialization: Coursera, offered by Johns Hopkins University
2. Health Informatics on FHIR (edX/Georgia Tech)
3. HL7 FHIR Official Site: https://hl7.org/fhir
4. DICOM Standard: https://dicomstandard.org/
5. IHE Technical Frameworks: https://profiles.ihe.net/
6. NextGen Mirth Connect Documentation: https://docs.nextgen.com/display/mirthconnect
7. NIH Digital Pathology Resources: https://www.pathologyatlas.nih.gov/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Third Year B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Ethical Hacking and Digital Forensics (DJS23DCPE614)
Ethical Hacking and Digital Forensics Laboratory (DJS23DLPE614)

Prerequisite: Information Security.

Objectives:
 To understand ethical hacking concepts, hacker classifications, and hacking methodologies.
 To understand and use basic tools and methods to find information about computer systems
through footprinting, scanning, and enumeration.
 To introduce the phases and tools used in penetration testing and system hacking.
 To explain the fundamentals and significance of digital forensics in various domains.
 To develop the ability to collect, preserve, and analyze digital evidence using proper techniques
and tools while considering legal and anti-forensic challenges.
 To familiarize students with modern forensic tools and techniques used in email and mobile
device investigations.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Explain ethical hacking concepts, hacker types, legal aspects, and real-world applications.
2. Use footprinting, scanning, and enumeration tools to gather system and network information.
3. Perform penetration testing and demonstrate basic system hacking techniques.
4. Identify digital evidence and apply file system and disk forensics tools.
5. Apply evidence collection, hashing, and anti-forensics detection methods.
6. Analyze network traffic, email artifacts, and mobile device data using forensic tools.

Ethical Hacking and Digital Forensics (DJS23DCPE614)
Unit Description Duration
1 Introduction to Ethical Hacking
Introduction to Ethical Hacking, Classification of Hackers (White Hat, Black Hat, Grey
Hat), Phases of Ethical Hacking, Cybersecurity vs Ethical Hacking, Cyber Laws and
Ethical Responsibilities, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence in Cybersecurity and
Hacking, Real-World Case Studies of Ethical Hacking

6

2 Footprinting, Scanning, and Enumeration
Footprinting Techniques, DNS Interrogation, Email Harvesting, Social Engineering,
Footprinting Tools (Maltego, Recon-ng), Scanning Methodology, Port Scanning Types
and Tools (Nmap, Netcat), Enumeration Techniques, Enumeration Tools (SNMP, SMB,
LDAP), Banner Grabbing, Use of AI for Automated Reconnaissance and Threat
Detection

6
3 Penetration Testing and System Hacking
Penetration Testing: Fundamentals of Penetration Testing, Types of Penetration
Testing (Black Box, White Box, Grey Box), Phases of Penetration Testing, Penetration
Testing Tools (Metasploit, Burp Suite, Nikto,etc)
System Hacking: Password Attacks (Brute -force, Dictionary, Rainbow Tables),
Privilege Escalation Techniques, Malware and Rootkits, Executing Applications and
Hiding Files, System Hacking Tools, Introduction to Dark Web and TOR Network,
Dark Web-based Threat Intelligence and Anonymity Tools

8
4 Introduction to Digital Forensics
Definition and Scope of Digital Forensics, Types and Characteristics of Digital
Evidence, Phases of a Digital Investigation, File System Forensics (FAT, NTFS), Disk
Imaging and Cloning (Bit-by-Bit Copy), Data Recovery Concepts, Deleted File and
Slack Space Analysis, Metadata Extraction and Timestamp Interpretation, Disk
Forensics Tools (FTK Imager, Autopsy, EnCase), Role of AI and Machine Learning
in Digital Forensics

7
5 Evidence Collection and Data Analysis
Evidence Collection Techniques (Live vs Dead), Chain of Custody and Legal
Considerations, Volatile and Non -Volatile Evidence Acquisition, Remote Evidence
Acquisition, Hashing Algorithms (MD5, SHA1, SHA256) for Verification, Write
Blockers and Imaging Devices, Anti -Forensics Techniques (Data Hiding,
Steganography, File Obfuscation), Detection and Countering Anti-Forensics, Use of AI
Tools for Pattern Detection and Data Anomaly Analysis, Data Carving and Signature -
Based Recovery.

8
6 Network, Email, and Mobile Forensics
Network Forensics (Packet Capture, Flow Analysis), Live Traffic Monitoring Tools
(Wireshark, TCPDump), Log File and Firewall Analysis, Intrusion Detection Logs,
Honeynet and Sandbox Environments, Email Forensics (Header and Server Log
Analysis, MIME Format), Mobile Device Forensics (Android and iOS), Acquisition
Techniques (Logical, Physical, Cloud), SIM and App Data Extraction, Tools (Cellebrite,
XRY, MOBILedit), Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) and Threat Attribution
Techniques

7
Total 42

Ethical Hacking and Digital Forensics Laboratory (DJS23DLPE614)
Exp. Suggested experiments
1 Footprinting and Reconnaissance:
Objective: Gather information about a target using passive and active footprinting techniques.
Tools: Recon-ng, theHarvester, SpiderFoot (for AI-powered OSINT), ThreatFox, VirusTotal
2 DNS Interrogation and Email Harvesting
Objective: Perform WHOIS lookups, DNS zone transfers, and identify email addresses.
Tools: nslookup, dig, whois, theHarvester
3 Scanning and Enumeration
Objective: Identify open ports, services, and perform OS detection.
Tools: Nmap, Netcat
4 Enumeration
Objective: Extract user and system info via SMB and SNMP protocols.
Tools: enum4linux, snmpwalk
5 Web Application Scanning
Objective: Scan a web server for vulnerabilities.
Tools: Nikto, OWASP ZAP, Burp Suite Community Edition
6 Exploitation Using Metasploit Framework
Objective: Exploit vulnerabilities in a virtual test machine.
Tools: Metasploit Framework, DVWA, Metasploitable VM
7 Password Cracking
Objective: Perform brute-force and dictionary attacks on password hashes and login services.
Tools: John the Ripper, Hydra, Hashcat
8 Disk Imaging and Basic Forensic Analysis
Objective: Create and analyze a disk image.
Tools: FTK Imager, Autopsy, dd
9 File System and Deleted File Analysis
Objective: Recover deleted files and analyze file system metadata.
Tools: Autopsy, Sleuth Kit (fls, icat), Scalpel
10 Hashing and Data Integrity Verification
Objective: Generate and verify file hashes to maintain evidence integrity.
Tools: md5sum, sha256sum, HashCalc
11 Network Traffic Capture and Protocol Analysis
Objective: Capture and analyze live network traffic for suspicious activity.
Tools: Wireshark, TCPDump
12 Email Header Analysis and Evidence Extraction
Objective: Trace the source of an email and extract digital evidence.
Tools: Autopsy (email plugin), ExifTool

13 Live Memory Acquisition and Analysis (Windows/Linux)
Objective: Acquire and examine volatile memory for evidence.
Tools: WinPmem (Windows), LiME (Linux), Volatility
14 Steganography and Anti-Forensics Detection
Objective: Detect hidden data in images and analyze steganographic files.
Tools: OpenStego, Steghide, binwalk
15 Dark Web Exploration & TOR-based Threat Discovery
Objective:To explore TOR and Dark Web Securely
Tools: TOR browser, OnionScan, Ahmia
16 Mobile Device Forensics and App Data Extraction
Objective: TOR browser, OnionScan, Ahmia
Tools: MOBILedit, ADB, Cellebrite (demo)
Any other practical covering the syllabus topics and subtopics can be conducted.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignments (10m).

Books Recommended:

Text books:
1. EC-Council “Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures Attack Phases”, Cengage Learning.2nd
Edition, 2017
2. Rafay Boloch, “Ethical Hacking and Penetration Testing Guide”, CRC Press, 2014.
3. John R. Vacca, “Computer Forensics”, Computer Crime Investigation Firewall Media, New
Delhi. 2012
4. Nelson, Phillips, Steuart, “guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations”, CENGAGE
Learning, 6th Edition, 2020.
5. E. Casey, “Digital Evidence and Computer Crime: Forensic Science, Computers and the
Internet”, 3rd ed. Burlington, MA, USA: Academic Press, 2011.
6. S. Davidoff and J. Ham, “Network Forensics: Tracking Hackers through Cyberspace”. Upper
Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall, 2012.

Reference Books:
1. Kevin Smith, “Hacking How to Hack - The ultimate Hacking Guide”, Hacking
Intelligence.2018
2. Kevin Beaver, “Ethical Hacking for Dummies”, Sixth Edition, Wiley, 2018.
3. Keith J. Jones, Richard Bejtiich, Curtis W. Rose, “Real Digital Forensics”, Addison- Wesley
Pearson Education 2006
4. Tony Sammes and Brian Jenkinson, “Forensic Compiling”, A Tractitioneris Guide, Springer
International edition.
5. Christopher L.T. Brown, “Computer Evidence Collection & Presentation”, Firewall Media.
6. Jesus Mena, “Homeland Security, Techniques & Technologies”, Firewall Media.
7. J. T. Luttgens, M. Pepe, and K. Mandia, “Incident Response and Computer Forensics”, 3rd ed.

New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill Education, 2014.

Web Links:
1. Ethical Hacking – IIT Kharagpur (NPTEL)
nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105217/
2. Digital Forensics – UTAustin / Prof. Matt L. (Free Online Course)
https://digital-forensics.utexas.edu/
3. Introduction to Cybersecurity Tools & Cyber Attacks – IBM (Coursera Free Audit)
https://www.coursera.org/learn/intro-cybersecurity-tools-cyber-attacks
4. Cybersecurity Fundamentals – University of Washington (edX Free Audit)
https://www.edx.org/learn/cybersecurity/university-of-washington-cybersecurity-fundamentals
5. Digital Forensic Techniques – OpenLearn (The Open University)
https://www.open.edu/openlearn/science-maths-technology/digital-forensics/content-section-0
6. Network Forensics – University of California, Davis (Coursera Free Audit)
https://www.coursera.org/learn/network-security
7. Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) Training – EUROPOL / ENLETS
https://osintframework.com/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
(Semester VI)

Third Year B.Tech. (DJS23)
Programme Elective Courses
SET II

Program: B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Computer Vision (DJS23DCPE616)
Computer Vision Laboratory (DJS23DLPE616)

Pre-requisite: Machine Learning -I, Machine Learning- II(Deep Learning)

Objectives: To equip students with advanced skills in image, video, and computer vision
processing, emphasizing feature extraction, shape and motion analysis, object detection, and
action recognition through both classical and deep learning approaches for effective v isual
understanding and prediction.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able
1. Apply fundamental image and video processing techniques for visual data analysis.
2. Analyze object detection and recognition algorithms for visual understanding.
3. Illustrate generative and segmentation-based visual learning models for scene understanding.

Computer Vision (DJS23DCPE616)
Unit Description Duration

1
Foundations of Computer Vision and Image Preprocessing
Basics of image processing. Image acquisition. Preprocessing. Enhancement.
Segmentation. Representation. Image transforms: Fourier Transform, Discrete
Cosine Transform, Wavelet Transform.
Morphological Image Processing:
Dilation, Erosion, Opening and Clo sing, Hit -or-Miss Transformation.
Morphological Algorithms: Boundary Extraction, Region Filling, Extraction of
Connected Components, Thinning, Thickening, Skeletons, Pruning,
Morphological Reconstruction. Image Preprocessing Challenges: Clutter,
deformation, intra -class variation, Gaussian blur, noise removal, illumination
variance, normalization techniques.

09

2
Shape Analysis and Segmentation Techniques in Vision
Contour-Based Methods: Chain Codes, Geometric Border Representation, Fourier
Transform of Boundaries, Boundary Description using Segment Sequences, B -
Spline Representation, Shape Invariants. Region -Based Methods: Scalar Region
Descriptors, Moments, Convex Hull, Graph Representation Using Region
Skeletons, Region Decomposition, Region Neighborhood Graphs.
Thresholding: Foundation, Role of illumination, Basic Global thresholding,
Otsu’s method Region Based segmentation: Region Growing, Region Splitting
and merging, Relationships between pixels, Hough transform.

10

3
Object Detection: Two Stage/Proposal: Convolutional Neural Networks for
Detection: R -CNN, Fast R -CNN, Faster R -CNN, RFCN and Mask RCN;
Architecture and Issues in each algorithm. Backprop -to-image/Deconvolution
Methods.
One Stage/Proposal Free: YOLO, SSD, evaluation metrics (IoU, AP), Non-max
suppression YOLO Loss function, Variants of YOLO.
Face Recognition and Verification: Zero-shot, One -shot, Few -shot Learning;

10

Siamese Networks, Triplet Loss, Contrastive Loss, Ranking Loss; Attention
Models in Vision.

4
Generative Models: Types of generative models: Implicit and Explicit density;
Generative Adversarial Network; Vanilla GAN, Mode Collapse in GAN
(Strategies to address Mode Collapse and Convergence Issues) ; Conditional
GAN, DC GAN, Wasserstein GAN (WGAN ), CycleGAN, StyleGAN ; GAN
objective functions, JSD Divergence, EM Distance, Least Squares, Evaluation
Metrics: Inception Score (IS), Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)
09

5
Object Segmentation: Semantic segmentation, Scene Parsing, semantic flow,
Bilinear Interpolation, Symmetry in Segmentation, Featured image pyramid,
pixel-wise softmax, PSPNet, FPN, UNet, clustering method for segmentation,
Distance metrics( Euclidean, Cosine, Hamming, Manhatt an, Minkowski,
Chebyshev, Jaccard, Haversine), Linkage Types (Single, Average, Complete,
Centroid).

10

6
Motion Analysis and Optical Flow: Basics of motion estimation and optical flow
using classical and deep learning methods . 3D Vision Components: Stereo
Matching, disparity estimation, depth computation.
Action Recognition and Object Tracking: Introduction to recognizing actions
and tracking moving objects in videos. Video Processing and Spatio -Temporal
Features Overview of video signals, motion models, and basic spatio -temporal
analysis.

08
Total 56

Computer Vision Laboratory (DJS23DLPE616)
Exp. Suggested Experiments
1 To perform morphological operations on Image.
2 To perform image enhancement in frequency domain.
3 To perform segmentation using region growing , merging and splitting.
4 To detect cancer cells using medical image processing techniques through CNN-based object detection.
5 To identify vehicles from road traffic CCTV video footage using the YOLO object detection algorithm.
6 To convert black-and-white images into colored images using GAN.
7 To detect deepfakes in digital media using GAN.
8 To perform image segmentation using advanced deep learning models such as PSPNet, FPN, and U -
Net.
9 To analyze body postures through motion analysis using spatio-temporal feature extraction techniques.
10 Mini Project
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m arks) and
Quizzes/Assignments (10marks).

Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Deep Learning, MIT Press, Reprint
Edition with updates, 2022.
2. Shafqat Alauddin, Mrutyunjaya S. Yalawar, S. Bharathidasan, T. Thiyagarajan, Image
Processing Techniques and its Applications in Computer Vision and Artificial Intelligence,
2024.
Reference Books:
1. Richard Szeliski, Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications , 2nd Edition, Springer,
2022.
2. Shafqat Alauddin, Mrutyunjaya S. Yalawar, S. Bharathidasan, T. Thiyagarajan, Image
Processing Techniques and its Applications in Computer Vision and Artificial Intelligence,
2024.

3. Kevin P. Murphy, Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction, MIT Press, 2022.
4. Rafael C. Gonzalez, Richard E. Woods, Digital Image Processing , 4th Edition, Pearson
Education, 2021.
Web Links:
1. Virtual Lab on Vision and deep learning Lab
https://www.ee.iitb.ac.in/~viplab/
2. Virtual Lab on Computer Vision Laboratory
https://www.iitk.ac.in/ee/computer-vision-lab
3. Course on Modern Computer Vision
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzWRmD0Vi2KVsrCqA4VnztE4t71KnTnP5
4. Coursera course on Advanced Computer Vision with TensorFlow
https://www.coursera.org/learn/advanced-computer-vision-with-tensorflow
5. Udemy course on Deep Learning and Computer Vision A -Z™: OpenCV, SSD & GANs |
Udemy
6. Vision Lab: Computer Vision http://cse.iitm.ac.in/lab_details.php?arg=NQ
7. Funded Projects on Computer Vision at NAVER LABS Europe
https://europe.naverlabs.com/research/computer-vision/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI

Course: Robotics and AI (DJS23DCPE617)
Robotics and AI Laboratory (DJS23DLPE617)

Pre-requisite: Linear algebra and Probability theory

Objectives: To introduce fundamental concepts, kinematics, perception, planning, and control in
robotics with an emphasis on data acquisition, machine learning, and autonomous navigation.

Course Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Illustrate the fundamental principles, components, and kinematics of robotic systems.
2. Apply sensor data acquisition, preprocessing, and fusion techniques using Python and ROS.
3. Analyze computer vision, path planning, and SLAM algorithms for perception and
navigation.
4. Develop control and decision-making strategies for autonomous robot operation.

Robotics and AI (DJS23DCPE617)
Unit Description Duration

1
Introduction to Robotics
Evolution of Robotics , Types of robots – industrial, mobile, humanoid, and
autonomous, Components of robotic system (sensing, actuation, control, AI), Types
of Sensors – IMU, LiDAR, Camera, GPS, Ultrasonic, Proximity Sensors (Infrared),
Vision Sensors, Accelerometers, Gyroscopes, and Encoders (Linear or Rotary ),
Types of Actuators – Electric (DC, Stepper, Servo Motors), Hydraulic, Pneumatic,
and Emerging Smart Actuators (Piezoelectric, Shape Memory Alloy, Electroactive
Polymer).

08

2
Robot Kinematics and Motion planning
Coordinate frames and transformations – homogeneous transformation matrices,
Forward and inverse kinematics; Denavit –Hartenberg (D –H) parameters,
Differential kinematics and Jacobians – conceptual and numerical examples,
Configuration space and robot moti on representation, Motion planning –
introduction, path and trajectory concepts,Types of trajectory planning – Point-to-
Point (PTP) and Continuous Path (CP).

12

3
Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
Data collection and preprocessing from multiple sensors through frameworks and
middleware (e.g., ROS) for acquisition, synchronization, and refinement of sensor
data., Understanding sensor data formats and structures (CSV, JSON, image/video
files and ROS bag files ). Noise handling using Gaussian, Median, and Kalman
filtering methods. Aligning multi-sensor data streams (camera, LiDAR, IMU) using
temporal synchronization, spatial calibration, and sensor fusion methods. Handling
missing or corrupted data using interpolation, statistical imputation, and smoothing
methods, Sensor calibration using intrinsic and extrinsic methods for camera –
LiDAR and IMU sensors.

08

4
Robot Perception
Introduction to robot perception and environment understanding, Computer vision
in robotics – image acquisition, feature extraction, and object recognition,
Application of machine learning and deep learning for perception: Classification
using CNN and SVM, Object detection using YOLO and SSD, Image segmentation
using U-Net and SegNet, building 3D representations from LiDAR using Voxel

08

Grid Mapping or from stereo vision using SGBM (Semi-Global Block Matching).

5

Path Planning
Path planning algorithms –Rapidly-exploring Random Tree(RRT) , and PRM ,
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) ,Components – Localization,
mapping, sensor data processing, Types of SLAM – Visual SLAM, LiDAR-based
SLAM, RGB-D SLAM, Data association and map building, Learning-based SLAM
and navigation using neural implicit mapping and p olicy learning, Integration of
SLAM with path planning and control for autonomous navigation , Evaluation
metrics – accuracy, drift, real -time performance, and scalability , Reinforcement
Learning for Navigation using Q -Learning, Sim-to-Real Transfer – Domain
Randomization, Imitation Learning, Challenges, and Evaluation.

12

6
Control and Decision Making
Control architectures – Open Loop, Closed Loop, and Hierarchical , PID and
Feedback Control, Model Predictive Control (MPC) for trajectory tracking ,
Behavior-Based Robotics – Subsumption Architecture and Reactive Control ,
Reinforcement Learning for Robot Control – DDPG, PPO, A3C, TRPO, TD3,
Human-Robot Interaction – Shared Autonomy, Intent Recognition, and Safety
Considerations.

08
Total 56

Robotics and AI Laboratory (DJS23DLPE617)
Sr.
No
Suggested Experiments
1 Install and explore ROS or Webots; visualize a simple robot model.
2 Simulate a robotic arm and perform forward and inverse kinematics using Python or MATLAB.
3 Acquire and preprocess sensor data (camera or LiDAR dataset) using Python.
4 Implement visual feature detection using SIFT or SURF, or deep object recognition using
YOLO or MobileNet.
5 Simulate SLAM using ROS or Gazebo datasets
6 Implement EKF-based localization or 2D SLAM using Python
7 Implement a RRT-based path planner in Webots or Gazebo
8 Implement PID control for a mobile robot simulation using Python or Webots.
9 Implement a simple reinforcement learning control policy for navigation or balancing tasks
using Python or Webots.
10 Integrate perception, localization, and planning on a simulated robot using TurtleBot or drone
simulation.
* The Term Work will be calcu lated based on Laboratory Performance (15m arks) and Assignments/
Quizzes (10marks).

Books Recommended
Text Books:
1. Roland Siegwart, Illah R. Nourbakhsh, and Davide Scaramuzza , “Introduction to Autonomous
Mobile Robots”, 3rd Edition, MIT Press, 2022.
2. Peter Corke , “Robotics, Vision and Control: Fundamental Algorithms in Python”, 3rd Edition,
Springer, 2023.
3. Jonathan Cacace, “Ultimate Robotics Programming with ROS 2 and Python”, 1st Edition, 2024.

Reference Books:
1. Mohamed M. Atia , “Sensor Fusion Approac hes for Positioning, Navigation, and Mapping: How
Autonomous Vehicles and Robots Navigate in the Real World with MATLAB Examples” , 1st
Edition, Springer, 2025.
2. Christoph Bartneck, Tony Belpaeme, Friederike Eyssel, Takayuki Kanda, Merel Keijsers & Selma
Šabanović, “Human-Robot Interaction – An Introduction” , 2nd Edition, Cambridge University
Press, 2024.

3. Larry T. Ross, Stephen W. Fardo & Michael F. Walach , “Industrial Robotics Fundamentals”, 4th
Edition, Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2023.
Web Links:
1. https://swayam.gov.in/nc_details/NPTEL (Introduction to Robotics by IIT Madras and Robotics
by IIT Kharagpur)
2. https://www.udemy.com/course/robotics-course/
3. https://www.coursera.org/courses?query=robotics

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI

Course: Applied Game Theory (DJS23DCPE618)
Applied Game Theory Laboratory (DJS23DLPE618)

Pre-requisite: Linear Algebra, Calculus, Probability, Statistics and Basic algorithm design and analysis.

Objectives:
 Introduce fundamental principles of strategic, zero -sum, non-zero-sum, and repeated games with
computational simulation.
 Develop the ability to model, analyse, and solve multi -agent interactions using algorithmic and
Python-based approaches.
 Familiarize students with evolutionary, cooperative, and Bayesian game -theoretic frameworks,
including reinforcement learning and human-in-the-loop feedback.
 Apply game -theoretic reasoning to real -world applications such as auctions, market design,
bargaining, and resource allocation.
Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Analyse and simulate strategic, zero -sum, and non -zero-sum games to identify Nash
equilibria and optimal strategies.
2. Apply algorithmic techniques and reinforcement learning to compute equilibria and model multi -
agent interactions.
3. Evaluate evolutionary, cooperati ve, and Bayesian game scenarios for fairness, stability, and
decision-making efficiency.
4. Design, implement, and assess real -world games and applications, including auctions, repeated
games, market design, and RL-based strategy optimization.
Applied Game Theory (DJS23DCPE618)
Unit Description Duration

1
Introduction to Game Theory:
Strategic games, players, strategies, payoffs; dominance, minimax, saddle points; pure
& mixed strategy Nash equilibria; real -world examples: auctions, pricing, simple
multi-agent interactions

08

2
Zero-Sum and Non-Zero-Sum Games
Zero-sum games, saddle points, matrix games; mixed strategies; non-zero-sum games,
iterated elimination of dominated strategies; Lemke–Howson algorithm.

08

3
Evolutionary and Cooperative Game Theory
Evolutionarily Stable Strategies (ESS), replicator dynamics, fictitious play;
cooperative games: transferable utility, core, Shapley value, nucleolus; correlated
equilibria; Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) and reward shaping with
human feedback.

10

4
Bayesian and Algorithmic Game Theory
Bayesian games, Bayes –Nash equilibrium, auctions, bilateral trading; complexity of
equilibrium computation; mechanism design basics; Vickrey auction, incentive -
compatible resource allocation.

10

5
Repeated and Extensive Form Games
Repeated games: Nash Folk Theorem, subgame perfect equilibrium, one-shot deviation
principle; extensive form games: game trees, backward induction, sequential equilibria

10

6
Game Design, Simulation, and Real-World Applications
Game design principles: payoff engineering, fairness, multiplayer dynamics;
applications: oligopoly models, voting games, matching markets, resource allocation,
utility theory; RL-based strategy optimization and human-in-the-loop feedback

10
Total 56

Applied Game Theory Laboratory (DJS23DLPE618)
Exp. Suggested experiments
1 Strategic-Form Games and Payoff Matrix Construction: Construct and simulate matrix games;
compute best responses and pure Nash equilibria.
2 Dominance Analysis and Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibria: Analyse dominance relations, compute
mixed strategies, and visualize payoffs.
3 Zero-Sum Game Simulation and Minimax / Saddle Points: Implement zero -sum games and
compute saddle points using Python.
4 Non-Zero-Sum Game Simulation and Iterated Elimination of Dominated Strategies: Solve non -
zero-sum games computationally and identify NE.
5 Lemke–Howson Algorithm Implementation: Compute Nash equilibria of bimatrix games
algorithmically.
6 Evolutionarily Stable Strategies (ESS) and Replicator Dynamics: Simulate population dynamics
and ESS in multi-agent systems.
7 Fictitious Play and Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL): Implement learning strategies
for repeated interactions and observe convergence.
8 Cooperative Game Theory: Core, Shapley Value, Nucleolus Computation: Compute fair
allocations in transferable utility games.
9 Bayesian Games and Bayes–Nash Equilibrium: Implement games with incomplete information and
compute equilibria.
10 Auction Simulation: First-Price, Second-Price, Sealed-Bid, and Online Auctions; Analyse strategy
and outcomes.
11 Repeated and Extensive Form Games: Simulate repeated strategies, subgame -perfect equilibrium,
and backward induction in game trees.
12 Matching Market and Resource Allocation Applications: Implement market design, matching, and
allocation scenarios computationally.
13 Custom Game Design with RL and Human -in-the-Loop Feedback: Design a multi -agent game,
implement RL agents, incorporate human feedback, and analyse strategic outcomes.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignments (10m).

Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. Game Theory: An Introduction, 3rd Edition by E.N. Barron, Wiley, 2024.
2. Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto, “Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction”,
MIT Press, 2nd Edition, 2022.
3. Binmore, K., Game Theory: A Very Short Introduction, OUP, 2010

Reference Books:
1. Shoham Y., Leyton-Brown K., Multiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-Theoretic, and
Logical Foundations, Cambridge University Press, 2024
2. Thomas Ferguson, Game Theory, World Scientific, 2018
Weblinks:
1. NPTEL Course: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105237
2. IIT Bombay: Useful Lecture Notes on Game Theory | IEOR @ IIT Bombay

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Information Security (DJS23DCPE619)
Information Security Laboratory (DJS23DLPE619)

Pre-requisite:
Computer Communication and Networks

Objectives:
 To understand the fundamental principles of cryptography, network security, and secure
communication mechanisms in modern computer systems.
 To apply symmetric and asymmetric encryption techniques to ensure confidentiality, authentication,
and data integrity.
 To analyse and evaluate security threats, vulnerabilities, and countermeasures, including the
application of machine learning techniques for intelligent threat detection.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, the learner will be able to:
1. Explain the fundamental concepts of cyber-attacks, defence strategies, guiding principles of modern
security practices, and apply number theory concepts such as modular arithmetic, Euclid’s
algorithm, and classical ciphers to illustrate basic cryptographic operations.
2. Apply appropriate encryption, hashing, and authentication protocols to design and implement secure
systems and data communication models.
3. Analyse different network threats and attacks such as DDoS, spoofing, and phishing, and evaluate
suitable defence mechanisms, including IDS, IPS, and firewalls.
4. Evaluate the role of machine learning models in cybersecurity, examining their effectiveness in
detecting and mitigating cyber threats in real-world scenarios.

Information Security (DJS23DCPE619)
Unit Description Duration
1 Introduction: Cyber Attacks, Defense, Strategies and Techniques, Guiding
Principles of Modern Security Practices. OSI security model.
Number Theory:
Modulo Arithmetic, Euclid’s Algorithm, Fermat’s and Euler’s Theorem, Chinese
Remainder Theorem, Cipher Properties, Substitution Ciphers – Mono-alphabetic
Ciphers, Polyalphabetic Ciphers, Transposition Ciphers.
10
2 Symmetric Cryptography:
Block Cipher, Fiestel Structure, Block Cipher Modes of Operation, S -DES, Double
DES, Triple DES, AES Algorithm.
Asymmetric Cryptography:
Private Key and Public Key Cryptography, The RSA algorithm, Key Management,
Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange, Key Exchange Algorithm.
10
3 Integrity and Authentication:
Cryptographic Hash Functions: Message Authentication, Secure Hash Algorithm
(SHA-512),
Message authentication codes: Authentication requirements, HMAC, CMAC,
Digital signatures, Elgamal Digital Signature Scheme.
Key Management and Distribution: Symmetric Key Distribution Using Symmetric
& Asymmetric Encryption, Distribution of Public Keys, Kerberos, X.509
Authentication Service, Public – Key Infrastructure
10

4 Network Security:
Network attacks, DoS and DDoS attack, Sniffing, Session hijacking, Spoofing,
Phishing, Cross -site Scripting (XSS), IPSec Protocol, SSL Handshake Protocol,
Firewalls, IDS Prevention and Detection.
12
5 Basics of Machine Learning in Cyber Security:
Cyber Threat Landscape, The Cyber Attackers Economy, why use machine learning
in cybersecurity? Real-World Uses of Machine Learning in Security, Spam Fighting:
An Iterative Approach, Limitations of Machine Learning in Security.
05
6 Machine Learning in Cybersecurity:
Machine Learning: Problems and Approaches, Classification and Clustering, an ML
approach for Security, Time Series Analysis and Ensemble Modeling: Analysis of
time series in cyber security, Prediction of DDoS attack, Ens emble learning methods
and voting ensemble methods to detect cyber attacks
09
Total 56

Information Security Laboratory (DJS23DLPE619)
Exp. Suggested experiments
1 Implement Playfair Cipher with key entered by user.
2 Implement polyalphabetic Cipher
3 Implement Simple and Advanced Columner Transposition technique
4 Implement Simplified DES
5 Implement Simple RSA Algorithm with small numbers.
6 Implement Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange
7 Implement DoS and DDoS attack using Hping.
8 Implement phishing attack using HTTrack Website Cloning.
9 Implement static code analysis using Flawfinder Python Distribution.
10 Implement packet sniffing using Wireshark and TCP Dump.
11 Implement cross site request forgery in a controlled virtual environment using DVWA Web
Server.
12 Implement firewalls using IP tables.
13 Implement Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS).
14 Implement Host based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS).
15 Implementing and Evaluating an Email Spam Classifier Using Naive Bayes or Logistic
Regression
16 Detection of DDoS Attacks in Network Traffic using Random Forest and Ensemble Methods
Minimum eight experiments from the above suggested list or any other experiment or mini project based
on syllabus will be included, which would help the learner to apply the concept learnt.
*The Term Work will be calculated based on Laboratory Performance (15m) and Assignments (10m).

Books Recommended:
Text Books:
1. William Stallings, “Cryptography and Network Security Principles and Practices”, Pearson/PHI,
8th Edition, 2023.
2. Behrouz A. Forouzan, Debdeep Mukhopadhyay, “Cryptography and Network Security”, McGraw
Hill, 3rd edition 2017
3. Clarence Chio and David Freeman (2018). “Machine Learning and Security: Protecting Systems
with Data and Algorithms”, O’REILLY Publications.
4. Soma Halder, Sinan Ozdemir“Hands-On Machine Learning for Cybersecurity”, 2018 Packt
Publishing

Reference Books
1. Atul Kahate, "Cryptography and Network Security”, McGraw Hill, 3rd Edition, 2013.
2. Bernard Menezes, Network Security and Cryptography, Cengage Learning: 2nd Edition, 2011.
3. Wade Trappe, Lawrence C Washington, “Introduction to Cryptography with coding theory”,
Pearson: 2nd Edition, 2006.
4. W. Mao, “Modern Cryptography – Theory and Practice”, Pearson Education: 1st Edition, 2003.
5. Charles P. Pfleeger, Shari Lawrence Pfleeger – Security in computing – Prentice Hall of India,
2015.

Web Links:
1. Damn Vulnerable Web Application (DVWA): https://dvwa.co.uk/
2. Open Web Application Security Project: https://owasp.org
3. Web penetration testing: https://pentesterlab.com
4. Penetration Testing: https://kali.org

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Shri Vile Parle Kelavani Mandal’s
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
(Autonomous College Affiliated to the University of Mumbai)

Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
(Semester VI)

Third Year B.Tech. (DJS23)
Multidisciplinary Minor

Program: B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Applied Data Science Engineering Laboratory (DJS23DLMD601)

Prerequisite: Foundations of Data Analysis, Database Systems, Python Laboratory.
Objectives: To introduce students to the fundamentals of big data processing, analytics, and
performance monitoring tools.
Outcomes: On completion of the course, learner will be able to:
1. Analyze large-scale datasets on real -time messaging workflows using Hadoop, HDFS,
MapReduce, and AMPS.
2. Develop data processing pipelines using ML models, and evaluate model drift using Apache
Spark.
3. Evaluate system metrics, KPIs, and workflows using Prometheus, G rafana, and Apache
Airflow.

Applied Data Science Engineering Laboratory (DJS23DLMD601)
Sr.
No
Suggested List Duration

1
Introduction to Big Data and Hadoop
 Big Data Concepts and Hadoop Architecture
 Core Hadoop Components.
 Hadoop Ecosystem
 Data profiling and documentation (EDA)

2

2
Hadoop Distributed File System
 Understand Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) architecture and
commands.
 Introduction to MapReduce
 Write and run a basic MapReduce program (WordCount).
 View MapReduce job output and logs.

2

3
Messaging Services using AMPS
 Real-time messaging using AMPS.
 Pub / Sub models
 Using SOW Topics and Historical Replay in AMPS
 Filtering, Message Queuing and Expiration/Acknowledgement in AMPS
 Complete Real-Time Messaging Workflow with AMPS: From Publish to
SOW

4

4
Introduction to Apache Spark
 Apache Spark ecosystem
 Setup and shell
 Real-time and Batch processing of high volume of data.
 Processing high volume records in-memory (SQL)

4

5
Data analytics and Visualization
 Spark Dataframe
 Build a classification pipeline using MLlib
 Apply feature transformers/regression model
 Data visualization using GraphX / Graph Frames.

4

6
Model Drift
 Introduction to Model Drift
 Types of Model Drift
 Drift Detection Techniques: Statistical tests, PSI, and distribution analysis
 Implementing Drift Detection using Apache Spark.

2

7
Prometheus – Metric Instrumentation and Monitoring
 Learn to install and configure Prometheus
 Instrument an application or system for metrics collection
 Scrape metrics using Prometheus
 Configure alerts using Alertmanager

2

8
Grafana – Dashboard Visualization
 Connect Grafana to Prometheus data source
 Create dashboards with time-series graphs, heatmaps, and charts
 Configure alerts in Grafana dashboards
 Visualize trends and analyze system/application performance

2
9
Performance Indicator
 Gather structured data from Grafana dashboards
 Identify all Key performance indicators (KPIs)
 Build a KPI matrix linking technical, operational, and business KPIs
 Present KPIs as insights to business stakeholders

2
10
Apache Airflow
 Install and configure Apache Airflow
 Create a Cron-based scheduled workflow (Airflow Cron Job)
 Configure and schedule a recurring job using Cron expressions
 Monitor DAG execution performance through Airflow’s UI

4
Total 28
*The term work will be calculated based on Laboratory performance (10marks) ,Computer Based
Assessment (10marks) and Quiz(05marks)
Books Recommended:
Textbooks:
1. Big Data with Hadoop and Spark: Analyze Massive Datasets with Apache Hadoop, Spark, and
NoSQL , Thompson Carter 2024.
2. Data Driven Science and Engineering: Machine Learning, Dynamical Systems, and Control
by Steven L. Brunton & J. Nathan Kutz. Cambridge University Press (2nd Edition 2022).

Reference Books:
1. Big Data Computing: Advances in Technologies, Methodologies, and Applications, Tanvir
Habib Sardar & Bishwajeet Kumar Pandey, 2023
2. Mastering Prometheus – William Hegedus, 2024

3. Data Pipelines with Apache Airflow, Second Edition, Julian de Ruiter, Ismael Cabral, 2024

Web Links:
1. https://www.udemy.com/course/grafana-tutorial
2. https://www.pluralsight.com/courses/prometheus-grafana-building-dashboards-data
3. https://airflow.apache.org/

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: B. Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI
Course: Environmental Studies (DJS23ICHSX10)

Pre-requisite: Interest in Environment and its impact on Human

Objectives: Familiarize students with environment related issues such as depleting resources,
pollution, ecological problems and the renewable energy scenario; Give overview of Green Technology
options.
Outcomes: On successful completion of this course, student should be able to:
1. Understand how human activities affect environment
2. Understand the various technology options that can make a difference

Environmental Studies (DJS23ICHSX10)
Unit Description Duration
1 Air Pollution
Sources of Air pollution. Definition of Air Quality Index and how it is measured. 02
2 Water Pollution
Sources of water pollution. Ground water pollution and eutrophication. 02
3 Noise Pollution
Noise pollution and sources. Decibel limits for hospital, library, silence zone. 01
4 Biodiversity loss
Value of Biodiversity. Endangered species. 01
5
Deforestation
Product and services provided by forests. Relationship between forests and climate
change.
02
6 Renewable Energy sources
Our energy needs and global energy crisis. Renewable energy sources. 02
7 Climate change
Greenhouse gases and climate change. 02
8 Green Technology
Data Center Energy Efficiency, Thin-Client and Energy Efficiency. 02
Total 14

Environmental Studies (DJS23ICHSX10)
Sr. No. Tutorial List
1 Case study on Smog.
2 Qualitative and Quantitative methods for Air Pollution Monitoring
3 Presentation on Water Pollution (Industrial, Sewage) explaining any specific case.
4 General Techniques in Water Quality Monitoring
5 List effects of noise pollution on human health. Measure decibel level in college library, canteen,
classroom
6 Case study on effect of Pollution on Biodiversity loss.
7 Radioactive and Hazardous Pollutants.
8 Debate for and against “To promote Economic growth, Deforestation is required.”
9 Presentation on different Renewable Energy Technologies.
10 Green Hydrogen: The Energy of Future

11 Report on major impact of Global warming on Environment giving real examples.
12 Report on advantages and examples of Green Building for Sustainable development,
13 Sustainable Software Design: Reducing energy/carbon footprint (e.g., green coding, optimized
AI/ML, efficient cloud usage)
14
Reducing AI's carbon footprint (efficient models, serverless) and applying AI for environmental
good, like optimizing energy grids, smart buildings, precision agriculture (water/fertilizer use),
waste management, and climate modeling.
Tutorial: (Term work: 25 marks)
 Minimum of 10 Tutorials required.
 The distribution of marks for term work shall be as follows:
i. Performance in Tutorial: 15 Marks
ii. Write-up/ Report: 10 marks
The final certification and acceptance of term work will be subject to satisfactory term work performance
and fulfilling minimum passing criteria in the term work.
Books Recommended:
Text books:
1. R. Rajagopalan, “Environmental Studies from Crisis to Cure”, 2 nd Edition, Oxford university press,
2011.
2. Erach Bharucha, “Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses”, University Grants
Commission (UGC) & Bharati Vidyapeeth Institute of Environment Education and Research
(BVIEER), 2005.
3. Narayanan, P., “Environmental Pollution: Principles, Analysis and Control”, CBS Publishers &
Distributors, 2009.
4. Mohammad Dastbaz, Colin Pattinson, Babak Akhgar, Morgan and Kaufman, “Green Information
Technology: A Sustainable Approach”, Elsevier, 2015.
Reference Books:
1. Paulina Golinska, Marek Fortsch, Jorge Marx-Gómez, “Information Technologies in Environmental
Engineering: New Trends and Challenges”, Springer, 2011

Web Links:
1. CITES: https://cites.org/eng
2. Convention on Biological Diversity: www.biodiv.org
3. Kalpvriksh: www.kalpvriksh.org
4. Water pollution: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_polution
5. Ecosan: www.eco-solutions.org

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal

Program: Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science) Semester: VI

Course: Innovative Product Development IV (DJS23IPSCX04)

Objectives:
1. To acquaint the students with the process of identifying the need (considering a societal
requirement) and ensuring that a solution is found out to address the same by designing and
developing an innovative product.
2. To familiarize the students with the process of designing and developing a product, while they work
as part of a team.
3. To acquaint the students with the process of applying basic engineering fundamentals, so as to
attempt at the design and development of a successful value-added product.
4. To inculcate the basic concepts of entrepreneurship and the process of self -learning and research
required to conceptualize and create a successful product.

Outcomes: On completion of the course, student should be able to:
1. Identify the requirement for a product based on societal/research needs.
2. Apply knowledge and skills required to solve a societal need by conceptualising a product,
especially while working in a team.
3. Use standard norms of engineering concepts/practices in the design and development of a n
innovative product.
4. Draw proper inferences through theoretical/ experimental/simulations and analyse the impact of the
proposed method of design and development of the product.
5. Develop interpersonal skills, while working as a member of the team or as the leader.
6. Demonstrate capabilities of self -learning as part of the team, leading to life -long learning, which
could eventually prepare themselves to be successful entrepreneurs.
7. Demonstrate product/project management principles during the design and development work and
also excel in written (Technical paper preparation) as well as oral communication.

Guidelines for the proposed product design and development:

 Students shall convert the solution designed in semester 3 and 4 into a working model, using various
components drawn from their domain as well as related interdisciplinary areas.
 The working model is to be validated with proper justification and the report is to be compiled in a
standard format and submitted to the department. Efforts are to be made by the students to try and
publish the extended technical paper, either in the institute journal, “Techno Focus: Journal for
Budding Engineers” or at a suitable publication, approved by the department research committee/
Head of the department.
 Faculty supervisor may provide inputs to students during the entire span of the activity, spread over
2 semesters, wherein the main focus shall be on self-learning.
 A record in the form of an activity log-book is to be prepared by each team, wherein the team can
record weekly progress of work. The guide/supervisor should verify the recorded notes/comments
and approve the same on a weekly basis.
 The focus should be on self-learning, capability to design and innovate new products as well as on
developing the ability to address societal problems. Advancement of entrepreneurial capabilities
and quality development of the students through the year long course should ensure that the design
and development of a product of appropriate level and quality is carried out, spread over two
semesters, i.e. during the semesters V and VI.

Guidelines for Assessment of the work:
 The review/ progress monitoring committee shall be constituted by the He ad of the Department.
The progress of design and development of the product is to be evaluated on a continuous basis,
holding a minimum of two reviews in each semester.
 In the continuous assessment, focus shall also be on each individual student’s contrib ution to the
team activity, their understanding and involvement as well as responses to the questions being raised
at all points in time.
 Oral examination should be conducted by Internal and External examiners. Students have to give
presentation and demonstration on their working model.
 The distribution of marks for term work shall be as follows:
1. Marks awarded by the supervisor based on log-book: 10
2. Marks awarded by review committee: 10
3. Quality of the write-up : 05
The overall work done by the team shall be assessed based on the following criteria:
1. Quality of survey/ need identification of the product.
2. Clarity of Problem definition (design and development) based on need.
3. Innovativeness in the proposed design.
4. Feasibility of the proposed design and selection of the best solution.
5. Cost effectiveness of the product.
6. Societal impact of the product.
7. Functioning of the working model as per stated requirements.
8. Effective use of standard engineering norms.
9. Contribution of each individual as a member or the team leader.
10. Clarity on the write-up and the technical paper prepared.
11. The semester reviews (V and VI) may be based on relevant points listed above, as applicable.

Guidelines for Assessment of Semester Reviews:
 The write-up should be prepared as per the guidelines given by the department.
 The design and the development of the product shall be assessed through a presentation and
demonstration of the working model by the student team to a panel of Internal and E xternal
Examiners, preferably from industry or any research organisations having an experience of more
than five years, approved by the Head of the Institution. The presence of the external examiner is
desirable only for the 2nd presentation in semester VI. Students are compulsorily required to present
the outline of the extended technical paper prepared by them during the final review in semester VI.

Prepared by Checked by Head of the Department Principal